Discussion Paper
Deutsche Bundesbank
No 33/2017
Moral suasion in
regional government bond markets
Jana Ohls
Discussion Papers represent the authors` personal opinions and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.
Editorial Board:
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978­3­95729­406­7 (Printversion)
ISBN 978­3­95729­407­4 (Internetversion)
Daniel Foos
Thomas Kick
Malte Knüppel
Jochen Mankart
Christoph Memmel
Panagiota Tzamourani
Non-technical summary
Research Question
There is an ongoing debate among policy makers and academics on banks' incentives to
invest in home government debt. One hypothesis is that governments use moral suasion
to persuade home government-owned banks to hold more home government debt. This
paper tests the moral suasion hypothesis in the context of German banks' state (i.e.
"Laender") government bond holdings.
Contribution
This study contributes to the literature by testing for moral suasion on the regional
instead of the national (consolidated) government level. This helps to better identify
direct links between governments and banks and control for banks' other incentives to
hold home government debt. The paper makes use of a detailed bank-level dataset on
German banks' state bond holdings (security-by-security) for the time period 2005-
2014.
Results
Findings are in line with the hypothesis that state governments use moral suasion on
banks that are fully or partially owned by the state, i.e. regional development banks and
Landesbanken. These banks hold more bonds issued by the state that the bank is located
in than all other banks. This effect becomes stronger if the state is performing poorly
with respect to the fiscal criteria of the German Stability Council.
Nichttechnische Zusammenfassung
Fragestellung
In Politik und Wissenschaft wird über die Anreize für Banken diskutiert, in heimische
Staatsanleihen zu investieren. Eine Hypothese ist, dass Regierungen über einen
moralischen Appell ("moral suasion") an die heimischen staatlichen Banken dazu
beitragen, dass diese Banken verstärkt heimische Staatsanleihen halten. Dieses Papier
untersucht die Hypothese des moralischen Appells im Kontext der Bestände von
deutschen Banken an Bundesländeranleihen.
Beitrag
Die Studie trägt zur Literatur bei, indem sie die Hypothese eines moralischen Appells
der Regierungen auf der regionalen anstelle der nationalen Ebene testet. So können die
Verbindungen zwischen Regierungen und Banken besser identifiziert werden und für
Gründe, aus denen Banken heimische Staatsanleihen halten, kontrolliert werden. Dieses
Papier verwendet einen detaillierten Datensatz zu den Beständen an
Bundesländeranleihen bei den deutschen Banken, und zwar auf der Ebene der einzelnen
Banken und einzelnen Anleihen für den Zeitraum 2005-2014.
Ergebnisse
Die Ergebnisse stehen im Einklang mit der Hypothese eines moralischen Appells der
Landesregierungen an die Banken, die sich in ihrem Besitz oder Teilbesitz befinden,
d.h. Förderbanken und Landesbanken. Diese Banken haben höhere Bestände an
Anleihen, die vom Bundesland begeben wurden, in dem die jeweilige Bank ihren Sitz
hat, als die übrigen Banken. Dieser Effekt ist stärker ausgeprägt, wenn das betreffende
Bundesland, gemessen an den Kriterien des deutschen Stabilitätsrats, fiskalisch schwach
aufgestellt ist.
BUNDESBANK DISCUSSION PAPER NO 33/2017
Moral suasion in regional government bond markets1
Jana Ohls
Deutsche Bundesbank
Abstract
In the context of the German regional government bond market, this paper studies the
hypothesis that governments use moral suasion to persuade home government-owned banks to
hold more home government debt. The empirical approach makes use of German banks'
ownership structure, heterogeneity in the states' fiscal strength and detailed bank-level panel
data on German banks' state bond portfolio on the security- and bank-level for the time period
Q4:2005-Q2:2014. Results show that home state-owned banks hold a significantly higher
amount of home state bonds than other home banks when fiscal fundamentals of the home state
are weak. Banks located in other German states hold fewer state bonds in these situations. These
findings are in line with moral suasion by state governments and are robust against controlling
for observed and unobserved alternative incentives for banks' (home) state bond holdings such
as risk-shifting by banks, lending opportunities or information asymmetries.
Keywords: banks' sovereign bond portfolios, home bias, moral suasion, political economy of
banking
JEL-Classification: G11, G18, G21, G28
1 Contact address: Jana Ohls, Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60314 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany. E-mail: jana.ohls@bundesbank.de.
The author is grateful for helpful discussions with and feedback from Jörg Breitung, Claudia Buch,
Manuel Buchholz, Werner Neus, Esteban Prieto, Wolfgang Rippin, Matthias Weiss, and participants of
the 2013 joint doctoral seminar of Frankfurt School of Finance and University of Tuebingen, the 2016
Tuebingen Hohenheim Economics (THE) Workshop, the 2017 ERFIN Workshop on Econometric
Research in Finance, and the Bundesbank research seminar. The author would like to thank Anne Beck,
Sebastian Blesse and Calebe de Roure for most efficient support in data collection. Any errors and
inconsistencies are solely the author's responsibility. The paper represents the author's personal opinions
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.
1
1 Introduction
During the European sovereign debt crisis, banks' large holdings of home
government debt had detrimental consequences for financial stability, bank lending, and
the real economy (Acharya, Eisert, Eufinger, and Hirsch, 2016; Becker and Ivashina,
2017). Policy makers and academics are striving for a better understanding of banks'
incentives to hold (home) government debt. One hypothesis is that governments use
moral suasion to persuade home banks to hold more home government bonds (Ongena,
Popov and van Horen, 2016; Weidmann, 2013).
The idea of moral suasion is that governments use explicit or implicit threats or the
understanding that favours will be reciprocated in the future to persuade private firms to
engage in activities that they would not do otherwise (Romans, 1966).2 Moral suasion is
difficult to observe directly but the theoretical literature suggests that governments have
an incentive to use moral suasion on home banks to hold home government debt if fiscal
fundamentals are weak and other investors are less willing to lend (Chari, Dovis and
Kehoe, 2016). The bank's incentive to act upon moral suasion should be particularly
high if the bank is owned by the government and/or politicians are members of its
supervisory board.
This paper tests the moral suasion hypothesis at the regional level in Germany, i.e.
for German banks' state ("Laender") bond holdings. The institutional setting in
Germany lends itself to the study of moral suasion on the regional level since there are
close links between state governments and banks, since states have their own budget
that they finance (inter alia) by borrowing in bond markets and since detailed data on
German banks' state bond holdings are available. My empirical methodolody uses
differences in the fiscal strength between states and over time as reported by the
German Stability Council3 to identify differences in the states' incentives to use moral
suasion. Specifically, the Stability Council evaluates the fiscal condition of German
states along four stability criteria and I construct an indicator capturing the number of
2 Moral suasion has been used in a wide array of policy areas, including labour policies and monetary
policy (Romans, 1966).
3 The German Stability Council assesses the risk of an impending budgetary emergency of states and
publishes its results annually (for detailed information on the Stability Council, see Section 2.2)
2
criteria that are breached by a state (i.e. "breaches of stability criteria").4 In addition, I
make use of differences in bank location and bank ownership to identify the incentives
of banks for collusion.
This paper applies a Heckman (1979) selection model to account for the impact of
moral suasion on a bank's decision whether to hold any state bonds (selection equation),
in addition to the impact on the volume of a bank's state bond holdings (outcome
equation). It is important to control for the self-selection of banks into holding state
bonds as moral suasion might trigger a bank to invest in home state bonds at all. In
addition, I study the impact of moral suasion on a bank's share in outstanding state
bonds by implementing a fractional logit model as proposed by Papke and Wooldridge
(1996) and fixed effects regressions.
Overall, my results are in line with moral suasion by state governments on (state-
owned) home banks. Home banks (i.e. banks located in the state that issues the bond)
are more likely to hold home state bonds and hold larger volumes of these bonds than
"out-of-state" banks (i.e. banks located in another German state). The preference for
home state bonds increases significantly when the state is in a weak fiscal condition and
the bank is directly owned by the state government (i.e. Landesbanken and regional
development banks). State-owned banks located in weak states hold more home state
bonds than state-owned banks located in "sound" states.
The key challenge for identifying the impact of moral suasion is to control for banks'
alternative incentives to hold home government debt. The regional setting of my
analysis mitigates differences in the institutional and regulatory framework that may
confound results in cross-country studies. Also, I explicitly control for alternative
hypotheses suggested by the literature, such as risk shifting (Farhi and Tirole, 2016),
political endearing (Koetter and Popov, 2017), other lending opportunities (Gennaioli et
al. 2014), and information asymmetries (Portes, Rey and Oh, 2001). Finally, I make use
of variation in state bond holdings between banks and within banks across different
issuers over time to control for unobserved incentives of banks for holding government
debt (identification through heterogeneity). To the best of my knowledge, this is the first
4 The stability criteria are the following: interest expense to tax income, outstanding state debt, structural
net lending/borrowing, and the credit funding ratio. They are evaluated in two dimensions, current and
future fiscal planning.
3
study that simultaneously controls for unobserved time-varying heterogeneity at the
bank-level and for the time-constant but bank-specific preference for a particular issuer,
e.g. for the home state. My findings on moral suasion remain. State-owned banks
increase their home state bond holdings more than other banks if the fiscal condition of
the home state worsens (i.e. the number of stability criteria that are breached increases).
The empirical analysis is based on a detailed panel dataset constructed from the
Securities Holdings Statistics (Bade, Flory and Schönberg, 2016), Capital Market
Statistics, Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics5 and bank supervisory data of the Deutsche
Bundesbank and data provided by the German Stability Council. My dataset includes all
state bond holdings (2,078 state bonds) of each German bank (2,024 banks) for the time
period Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014 and hence covers tranquil times, the financial crisis and the
European debt crisis period. The data suggest that German banks are important for the
funding conditions of state governments since they hold 64% of the outstanding volume
of German state bonds (Q2:2014). At the same time, German state governments own
regional development banks and, partly, Landesbanken, thereby controlling 17% of the
German banking system's total assets (Monthly Balance Sheet Statistic of the Deutsche
Bundesbank).6 This setting may render moral suasion particularly attractive to state
governments.
Governments can exert moral suasion on (state-owned) banks through several
channels such as conversations, membership of state politicians in bank supervisory
boards, explicit mandates or anticipatory obedience of state-owned banks. I find that a
bank's preference for home state bonds is larger if the state owns a larger share of the
bank's equity, if the bank is owned by only one instead of several states and if the share
of politicians on the supervisory board is higher.
The results on moral suasion are robust to controlling for unobserved time-varying
heterogeneity at the issuer level, to different measures of a state's fiscal strength and
different clustering of standard errors, to constraining the sample to the period after the
5 For more information on the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, see
https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Standardartikel/Service/Reporting_systems/monthly_balance_
sheet_statistics.html?https=1
6 While the relationship between governments and savings banks is close at the municipality level as well,
data on bank lending to municipalities is scarce.
4
introduction of the Stability Council (from 2010 onwards), and to excluding special
types of states.
This study is related to several streams of literature, most importantly the recent
papers on moral suasion in European government bond markets. These empirical
studies on large European banks find that home banks (Horváth, Huizinga and
Ioannidou, 2015; Ongena et al., 2016), publicly owned banks (Altavilla, Pagano and
Simonelli, 2016; Becker and Ivashina, 2017; De Marco and Macchiavelli, 2016;
Ongena et al., 2016) and banks headed by politicians (Becker amd Ivashina, 2017; De
Marco and Macchiavelli, 2016) tend to hold more home sovereign debt, especially in
risky countries (Altavilla et al., 2016; Horváth et al., 2015) and at times in which
governments have high funding needs (Ongena et al., 2016).
This paper contributes to the literature by testing for moral suasion on the regional
instead of the consolidated government level which mitigates differences in the
institutional framework and helps to better identify the direct links between
governments and banks. Also, the empirical approach better accounts for alternative
incentives of banks to invest in (home) government debt by controlling for unobserved
heterogeneity at the bank-time and issuer-bank level. Finally, the sample extends the
evidence for moral suasion beyond large banks and countries that are experiencing a
sovereign debt crisis.
The empirical literature has identified several other reasons for banks to hold
government debt that I control for in my empirical analysis: Risk-shifting by banks
(Horváth et al., 2015), discrimination of foreign bond holders (Brutti and Sauré, 2014),
hedging of redenomination risk (Battistini, Pagano, and Simonelli, 2014) and political
endearing of banks (Koetter and Popov, 2017). Using a similar dataset as this paper,
Koetter and Popov (2017) study the impact of political elections on the political
endearing of savings banks. They find that savings banks owned by municipalities that
are politically misaligned with the state government (i.e. governed by a different
political party) have a higher exposure to the home state (relative to their assets). While
the study by Koetter and Popov (2017) focuses on municipal-owned savings banks, I
focus on state-owned Landesbanken and regional development banks that are politically
5
aligned through direct state ownership. Furthermore, I use the variation between home
and out-of-state banks and "sound" and "weak" German states.
This study also relates to the research on the determinants of prices in the German
state government bond market. Heppke-Falk and Wolff (2008) and Lemmen (1999) find
that yields increase, and thus prices decrease, with higher indebtedness of the state,
although only to a limited extent. My findings suggest that it is worthwhile to account
for the differences in investors' incentives for holding state bonds when studying the
impact of fiscal fundamentals on market prices. Schulz and Wolff (2008) document
differences in funding strategies between German states for the time period 1992 ­ 2007
and a common liquidity event in state bond spreads in 2007. My empirical approach
takes that into account by controlling for unobserved heterogeneity at the issuer-time
level and, in a robustness check, at the bank-issuer level.
A good understanding of banks' incentives to hold government debt is important
since banks' exposures towards risky government bonds have adverse consequences for
bank stability (Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl, 2014; Buch, Koetter, and Ohls, 2016),
bank lending to the private sector (Becker and Ivashina, 2017; Popov and van Horen,
2015) and the real economy (Acharya et al., 2016). Also, a larger home bias in banks'
government bond portfolios is associated with higher government debt levels and lower
government borrowing costs (Asonuma, Bakhache, and Hesse, 2015). Asonuma et al.
(2015) conclude that banks' home bias may give governments more time for
consolidation but at the same time pose the risk of delaying necessary reforms.
The remaining part of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 derives the
hypothesis on moral suasion from the existing theoretical literature and discusses the
institutional background in Germany. Section 3 explains the construction of the dataset
and shows descriptive evidence on the state bond holdings of German banks. Section 4
discusses the empirical methodology and presents the results. Section 5 concludes.
6
2 Theoretical hypotheses and institutional background
2.1 Theoretical hypotheses
The theoretical literature offers several hypotheses on why banks invest more in
home than in foreign government debt. These include risk-shifting by risky banks (Ari,
2016; Farhi and Tirole, 2016), information asymmetries (Portes et al., 2001),
discrimination of foreign borrowers (Broner, Erce, Martin and Venture, 2014), and
moral suasion (Chari et al., 2016) which is the focus of this paper. This Section briefly
describes the theoretical model and its implications, while the following Section 2.2
discusses how the hypothesis relates to the institutional setting in Germany. The
alternative hypotheses are discussed and tested in Section 4.3.2.
Chari et al. (2016) augment a standard neoclassical model with banks in the spirit of
Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) to study the government's incentives for pressuring banks
into holding home government debt. Chari et al. (2016) assume a benevolent
government that funds expenditures by levying taxes and borrowing in debt markets
subject to a borrowing constraint. Banks face a collateral constraint limiting bank
borrowing and thus lending by bank's net worth. As a result, higher holdings of home
government debt come at the cost of lower private lending (crowding out). Benefits
from requiring banks to hold home government debt arise in the model from alleviating
the government's borrowing constraint, smoothing taxes and thus consumption.7 The
government's borrowing constraint is relaxed because default is assumed to be strategic
and higher government bond holdings of home banks serve as a commitment device for
the government to repay its debt in order to avoid domestic output costs (Chari et al.,
2016).8
The model predicts that the government requires home banks to hold home
government debt (by means of a regulatory constraint), when the government faces
funding needs exceeding its borrowing constraint. This situation may occur when the
7 While governments in Chari et al. (2016) smooth taxation, German states are generally not able to
increase tax rates because these fall into the authority of the German central or municipal governments.
However, German states may engage in smoothing government expenditures.
8 The reason is that a default on home banks would reduce bank lending, and thus domestic investment
and growth. Basu (2009), Broner et al. (2014) and Gennaioli et al. (2014) build models with a similar
mechanism but study the probability of a sovereign default and not the implications for moral suasion.
7
government is in a weak fiscal situation and therefore non-home investors are less
willing to lend (Chari et al., 2016).
Moral suasion hypothesis part (I): The government requires home banks to hold
home government bonds if it has weak fiscal fundamentals because banks from other
states are less willing to hold government bonds in these situations.
I test this hypothesis using differences in fiscal strength between German states as
reported by the Stability Council and by comparing state bond holdings of home versus
out-of-state banks.
While Chari et al. (2016) model the government's ability to impact home banks'
investment decisions as a binding regulatory constraint, European banking regulation
favours government bonds issued in domestic currency but does not differentiate
between government issuers on the regional level. Instead, state governments might
impact the investment decisions of home banks through moral suasion (Romans, 1966).
Moral suasion should be particularly effective on state-owned banks due to the
government's close relationship with these firms. The political view of state-owned
firms (Shleifer and Vishny, 1994) suggests that governments might use its control over
state-owned firms to pursue private goals. In fact, banks have been shown to engage in
politically motivated private lending (see, among others, Dinc, 2005; Khwaja and Mian,
2005; Sapienza, 2004). The second part of my hypothesis on moral suasion therefore
refers to the special role of state-owned banks.
Moral suasion hypothesis part (II): Moral suasion by governments is particularly
effective for banks that are directly owned by the state or that have state politicians on
the supervisory board as these banks have higher incentives to concede to moral
suasion.
I test this hypothesis using an indicator for state ownership of a bank, using data on the
degree of state ownership and on supervisory board members of large banks.
8
2.2 Institutional background
Germany is a federal republic consisting of 16 states ("Laender"), each of them
having their own budget.9 State debt accounts for 30% of consolidated German
government debt (Q2:2014, Deutsche Bundesbank) and the funding structure of German
states has shifted from bank loans to bonds in recent years (Figure 1). Due to limited
data availability on banks' lending to German states, this analysis focuses on the bond
market for which detailed information is available (see Section 3.1).10
The fiscal situation varies considerably between states and over time as illustrated,
for example, by the distribution of the interest expenses to tax income (in %) and the
state government debt (per capita in thsd euro) in the upper panel of Figure 2. The
analysis makes use of these differences in states' fiscal situation to identify fiscally
weak states that may have a larger incentive to sway home banks into holding home
state bonds (see moral suasion hypothesis part (I)).
The German Stability Council
The German Stability Council helps with identifying these fiscally weak states as it
increases market transparency on the fiscal situation of states through detailed annual
reports. The council was established on April 28, 2010 to strengthen the framework for
fiscal sustainability in Germany and is a joint body of the German states and the
German federation. It is led by the respective finance ministers and advised by an
independent scientific committee. The Stability Council assesses the risk of a budgetary
emergency in the German states along four criteria and publishes the results on its
website in the fourth quarter of each year. The criteria include structural net
lending/borrowing, credit funding ratio (i.e. the degree to which the current budget is
financed by net borrowing), interest expense to tax income ratio and outstanding debt.
They are evaluated in two dimensions: the current budgetary situation (covering the
current and last two years) and future fiscal planning (covering the next four years). For
9 In order to finance higher expenditures, German states are generally not able to increase tax rates
because these are set by the German central and municipal governments. Instead, German states may
finance fiscal deficits by borrowing directly from banks as well as in the bond market. Differences in the
tax income between states generally reflect differences in economic strength and are largely rebalanced
through horizontal and vertical fiscal equalization schemes.
10 While the credit register in Germany now includes data on bank loans to states, government borrowers
were excluded from the reporting requirements until 2014 and a reporting threshold of 1.5mn euro
applies.
9
each of these criteria, the Stability Council reports a threshold that is derived from the
average value of all states plus an allowance. A state is marked as "noticeable" (in a
negative sense) with respect to a criterion if the state breaches the threshold.11
My baseline measure for the fiscal situation of a state is the number of stability
criteria that a state breaches. The indicator "breaches of stability criteria" is ordinal and
can take values from zero breaches to eight breaches (i.e. four criteria times two
dimensions). The advantages of this indicator are that it combines the information from
all stability criteria and focuses on observations where the case for moral suasion might
be particularly strong since the state has been marked as having a relatively weak fiscal
condition. Table 1 shows the cross-sectional variation (i.e. between states) and the time
variation (i.e. within states) of the indicator. In a robustness check, I use the underlying
continuous indicators (i.e. structural net lending/borrowing, credit funding ratio, interest
expense to tax income and outstanding debt) to capture the fiscal situation of states.
One concern is whether investors take the differences in states' fiscal situation into
account given high credit ratings (varying between AAA and AA for the 11 out of 16
states that are rated) and bailout expectations (Heppke-Falk and Wolff, 2008). However,
the German federal government and the states are in principle not liable for the debt
burden of each other. Instead, German Basic Constitutional Law guarantees the sole
fiscal responsibility of states for their debt (Article 109 Para 1 Basic Constitutional
Law). Under certain conditions though, the Constitutional Court may decide on
transfers from the German federal government to a state. Even if positive, these court
decisions may lead to a delay in the redemption of state bonds. Heppke-Falk and Wolff
(2008) and Lemmen (1999) show that state bond spreads reflect differences in state debt
ratios, at least to some extent. This means that latent credit risks are highest for states
that are in a relatively weak fiscal condition.
Also, while benefits from moral suasion might be lower for German states than for
high credit risk countries, costs in terms of crowding out (Chari et al., 2016) might be
11 If a state breaches more than two criteria, the Stability Council evaluates whether the state is at risk of a
budgetary emergency. If so, the state enters a consolidation program. As of 2011 five states (Berlin,
Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig Holstein) entered a consolidation programme. These
state governments have to submit a consolidation plan that is evaluated by a committee and have to
ensure the reduction of net borrowing within the next five years. Consolidation members have to report
on their progress to the Stability Council on a semi-annual basis.
10
lower as well due to the eligibility of German state bonds as collateral in interbank and
Eurosystem refinancing operations.12 The net effect is hence unclear. My findings
suggest that banks located in other states reduce their bond holdings of states that have a
deteriorating fiscal condition (i.e. a larger number of stability criteria that are breached).
This supports the case for moral suasion on the German regional government bond
market.
Ownership structure of the German banking system
Another institutional feature used in this analysis is the heterogeneity in the
ownership structure of German banks. For a general description of the German banking
system, see Koetter (2013). Regarding bank ownership, I distinguish four groups: (i)
privately-owned banks (such as commercial banks and specialized banks, e.g. mortgage
banks); (ii) mutually-owned cooperative banks; (iii) savings banks which are owned by
the municipality; and (iv) state-owned banks, i.e. Landesbanken and regional
development banks.
Moral suasion is expected to be particularly effective for the latter group of state-
owned banks and for banks with state politicians on their supervisory board (hypothesis
part II). I use the term "moral suasion" in a broad sense to summarize various means of
government influence, including conversations, membership of state politicians in bank
supervisory boards, explicit mandates or anticipatory obedience of state-owned banks.
The different channels are difficult to disentangle as they are likely to be used
complementarily. Table 2 summarizes detailed data on the degree of government
control and on supervisory board members that allows me to test for some of these
channels.
In total, 20 banks, which account for 17% of the German banking system's total
assets, are directly owned by state governments in Q2:2014. During the entire sample
period from 2005 to 2014 there are 23 state-owned banks (for more details on these
banks, see the Data Appendix to this paper). On average, state governments own 83% of
these banks' capital, savings associations own 11%, other public banks own 3% and the
remaining share is held by other investors (Table 2). The so-called "regional
12 Roughly 72% of German state bonds have been eligible as collateral in Eurosystem refinancing
operations (see Section 3.2).
11
development banks" are fully state-owned and their debt is guaranteed by the states.13
One fifth of state-owned banks are owned by more than one state government. I test
whether multiple state owners limit the ability of a state to impact the bank's investment
decisions. Table 2 further shows that on average 44% of supervisory board members of
state-owned banks are state politicians but there is a large heterogeneity between banks
that I will exploit in the empirical analysis.
My main approach uses the extensive margin of state ownership, i.e. the variation
between state-owned and other banks to test for moral suasion. State ownership is a
structural characteristic of the German banking system that has persisted for a long time.
This addresses the concern that the degree of state ownership might be endogenous to
banks' state bond holdings (for a detailed discussion on endogeneity issues, see Section
4.2.2). In further tests, I use differences in the intensity of state control as reflected in
the (time-varying) state ownership share and the share of state politicians in the
supervisory board of banks.
3 Data and descriptive statistics
3.1 Data sources
This Section introduces the datasets and discusses data preparation. A detailed
description of the constructed variables can be found in the Data Appendix to this paper.
Securities Holdings Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank (Bade et al., 2016)
The German state bond market has a size of 315 bn euro of which 81% (254 bn euro)
are included in the Securities Holdings Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank
(Q2:2014). My analysis focuses on state bond holdings by German banks which are
available for all German banks on a security-by-security and bank-by-bank level.
German banks hold 64% (162 bn euro) of the outstanding volume of state bonds in the
Securities Holdings Statistics (Q2:2014).The time period runs from Q4:2005 to
13 There are two development banks that are fully guaranteed by the German central government and are
therefore not included in the group of state-owned banks, the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KFW) and
the Landwirtschaftliche Rentenbank. While the KFW is partly owned by the states (20% of equity), it's
liabilities are fully guaranteed by the central government and therefore assigned to the group "Other
MFI". Results are robust against treating the KFW as a (partly) state-owned bank.
12
Q2:2014 and thus covers pre-crisis times, the financial crisis and the European
sovereign debt crisis.
The dataset covers the entire German banking system and thus complements earlier
studies on moral suasion that focus on large banks only (Horváth et al, 2015; Ongena et
al, 2016). I exclude branches of foreign-owned banks, as their investment behavior
typically depends on the business model of the parent banks, which I do not have
information on. This gives 2,024 banks (unbalanced sample due to mergers, entries and
exits). The number of banks per quarter decreases from 1,982 in Q4:2005 to 1,732 in
Q2:2014.
I follow the bank supervisory classification of the Deutsche Bundesbank in sampling
existing banks. In case of mergers, this implies that the bank that is taking over remains
in the sample and reports state bond holdings for both entities together. The asset
growth of the absorbing bank is controlled for by including a dummy variable in the
estimations. Most mergers have been taken place within the groups of small savings or
cooperative banks, but there have been three events within the group of state-owned
banks, that are given in the data appendix 2.A.14 Therefore, Section 4.3.1 checks the
robustness of the results to excluding the period before 2010 which encompasses the
merger and recapitalization events stemming from losses during the financial crisis
(Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2011).
I include only banks' bond holdings on their own account and not those on behalf of
bank customers since banks cannot actively manage the latter. Furthermore, I use
notional values of bond holdings to focus on quantity and not price effects.
Information on the issuer of the bond is obtained from Bloomberg and merged to the
securities holdings data using the ISIN of each security. I include bonds issued by
German states only. Specifically, I exclude banks' holdings of bonds issued by bad
banks, such as "Erste Abwicklungsanstalt", because the state is liable only for part of
the bond. Also, I exclude 41 bonds issued jointly by several German states
14 While WestLB AG exited in 2012, Portigon AG became its legal successor and thus the identifier of
the bank did not change, following banking supervisory classifications. The size of the bank did only
decrease slightly. Furthermore, there has been a merger between two regional banks in the same state in
2011. While the owner did not change, the merger had a scale effect on the absorbing bank that is
controlled for through a dummy.
13
("Gemeinsame Laender Anleihe")15 because I am not able to identify the share and
participation of individual states in these bonds (German banks' holdings equal 8 bn
euro). Finally, I exclude one security issued jointly by German states and the central
government. As a result, my dataset includes 2,078 securities with aggregate holdings
by German banks worth 162 bn euro.
For the estimations, I aggregate security holdings of bank i in quarter t to the issuer
(i.e. state) level. To account for the right-skewed distribution of the dependent variable,
I take natural logarithms of state bonds holdings.16 The inflated dataset that includes all
bank-issuer-time combinations has 1,031,203 observations and 89,171 non-zero
observations. This allows me to study the impact of bank and issuer characteristics on
the extensive and intensive margin of banks' state bond holdings.
Capital Market Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank
Data on security characteristics such as amount outstanding, amount issued, issue
and redemption date are taken from the Capital Market Statistics of the Deutsche
Bundesbank. These variables are used to clean the data suc as reported holdings prior to
the placement of the security or after redemption (111 observations are dropped).
Data on the initial price, coupon type and rate are in principle also available, but
around half of the state bonds are floating coupon bonds with no further details on the
coupon rate.
Bank supervisory and statistical data of the Deutsche Bundesbank
Bank control variables including size (i.e. log total assets), capitalization, deposit
ratio and commitment ratio are constructed from the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of
the Deutsche Bundesbank (for a definition of variables, see 2.A).17 These variables are
available at a quarterly frequency; the information on banks' non-performing loans
(NPL) obtained from the annual financial statements submitted to the Deutsche
15 Federal states that regularly participate in these joint issuances are Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-
West Pomerania, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland, Schleswig-Holstein and Thuringia.
16 Due to technical reasons, mainly, 4% of observations on the security level are negative positions, but
the majority cancels out on the issuer level. Merely 0.3% of observations need to be dropped in order to
take logs.
17 For more information on the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank, see
https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Standardartikel/Service/Reporting_systems/monthly_balance_
sheet_statistics.html?https=1
14
Bundesbank is available at an annual frequency. To account for the statistical breaks in
the prudential definitions of NPL, I use a relative NPL indicator that is equal to one for
banks in the highest quartile of the NPL distribution of the respective year (the indicator
remains unchanged within one year). These control variables account for differences in
the size and business models between banks that may affect the banks' demand for
government bonds (for a detailed discussion, see Buch et al., 2016).
Information on bank type, state ownership and the location of the banks'
headquarters is taken from bank supervisory data of the Deutsche Bundesbank. I
construct an indicator "state-owned" that is equal to one for banks that are directly
owned by the state government.
Public (financial) reports and supervisory data on the 23 state-owned banks and 16
other large German banks have been used to identify time-varying ownership shares of
state governments and other owners (such as the federal government or banking
associations) and to collect information on the supervisory board members of these
banks. These data have been gathered for the largest German banks due to data
availaibility.
State variables
Macroeconomic data on German states (including state debt and population) is
collected from the German Federal Statistical Office. I use annual core state debt per
capita as measure for the state debt burden and interpolate it to quarterly frequency.
Further information on the fiscal situation of the state is taken from the online
publications of the German Stability Council.18 I construct the composite, ordinal
indicator "breaches of stability criteria" as defined in Section 2.2. The assessments of
the Stability Council are available since Q4:2010 and updated in the fourth quarter of
each year (remaining constant throughout the year).
18 For more information on the Stability Council, see
http://www.stabilitaetsrat.de/EN/Home/home_node.html
15
3.2 Descriptive statistics
The structure of the German state bond market
The following descriptive statistics and regressions are based on 2,078 state bonds
included in the Securities Holdings Statistics (without joint state bonds) with an
aggregate volume of 254 bn euro of which 64% (162 bn euro) are held by German
banks (Q2:2014).
Between Q4:2005 and Q2:2014, German states have placed 1,456 new state bonds
(excluding joint state bonds). State bonds are often privately placed (Koetter and Popov,
2017) and have a much smaller bond size (260 mn euro on average) than central
government bonds (6,960 mn euro on average) that are publically auctioned to a group
of eligible financial institutions. With respect to other bond characteristics, the state
bond market consists mainly of coupon bonds (57%) and floaters (42%), while the
central government bond market is dominated by zero coupon bonds (57%), followed
by coupon bonds (42%) and only a few floaters (1%). The average maturity of a state
bond in my sample is 6.2 years and thus below the maturity of central government
bonds which is 8.3 years on average. Foreign currency denomination plays a minor role
in the state bond market (2.5% of state bonds). Schulz and Wolff (2008) document
differences in the volume and frequency of bond placements between German states.
My empirical approach accounts for these differences in funding strategies between
states through issuer-time and bank-issuer fixed effects.
Given private placements, my results are not likely to be driven by the potential role
of dealer banks that redistribute state bonds in the secondary market. In fact, the data
shows that changes in the investor base of a particular security are not more frequent in
the quarters immediately after a bond's placements than later during the bond's life.
Overall, the average state bond is traded at least 9 times within my sample period
(Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014; based on quarter-on-quarter changes).19
The holder structure on the security level is rather concentrated in the German state
bond market. One-third of all bonds are held by one bank only. These bonds tend to
have a 50% smaller volume than other state bonds but a similar maturity and
19 I can only approximate the trading pattern by quarter-on-quarter changes in the ownership of a
particular bond since flow data are not available.
16
Eurosystem eligibility. The average state bond is held by 7 German banks
simultaneously, while 10% of German state bonds are held by more than 21 banks in
the average quarter. Section 4.2.2 studies the share of a bank in outstanding state bonds
at the issuer level in greater detail.
The role of German banks in the state bond market
German banks are the most important investors in the state bond market. They hold
on aggregate 64% of the outstanding volume of these bonds (Q2:2014). By comparison,
German banks hold only 1.1% of the outstanding volume of German central
government bonds (i.e. "bunds"). Instead, foreign investors (incl. foreign central banks)
are primarily active in the bund market due to the larger bond sizes and the availability
of ratings. Public information on credit risk is less easily available in the state bond
market. Only 11 out of 16 states have a rating from a major rating agency, which might
constrain some types of investors. As a result, German banks focus on the regional
rather than the central government bond market and invest on average 41% of their total
government bond portfolio in German state bonds and only 3% in "bunds" (Table 3).
Within the German banking system, state-owned banks are the largest creditors in the
state bond market. While the average German bank holds only 0.09 bn euro in state
bonds, an average state-owned bank holds state bonds worth 2.06 bn euro (Table 3).
The picture remains similar after controlling for bank size. State-owned banks invest
more than 3% of their assets in state bonds, while commercial banks invest a mere 1%
and savings and cooperative banks 2% of their assets (Q2:2014). Consequently, the
group of state-owned banks hold 16% of the outstanding volume of German state bonds
which is a larger market share compared to the other banking groups, despite the
relatively small number of state-owned banks. Investment decisions by state-owned
banks are thus particularly relevant for the funding conditions of states, which may
increase the governments' incentives for using moral suasion.
Despite the general importance of state bonds for German banks, about 26% of them
do not hold any state bonds at all during my sample period. Probit estimations on the
banks' likelihood of not holding any state bonds show that these banks tend to be
smaller, have a lower deposit ratio and a higher capital ratio (relative to unweighted
assets) (results available upon request). These banks might be less in need for zero risk
17
weighted assets, such as state bonds, to support their regulatory capital ratio. Many
banks enter and exit the state bond market frequently such that only about 45% of
German banks hold some state bonds in the average quarter. This self-selection of banks
into holding state bonds needs to be taken into account in the empirical approach, which
I do by applying a Heckman model.
The degree of "home bias" in German banks' state bond portfolios
In order to derive a descriptive measure for a banks' preference of home state bonds
which takes into account the size of the home state, I follow Coeurdacier and Rey
(2013). Based on the standard Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), they measure
home bias as the deviation of an investor's share of home assets in the portfolio from
the share of home assets in the market portfolio. Transferring this idea to the
subnational level, the "home bias" in the state bond portfolio of a bank i in quarter t can
then be calculated as follows:
= 1 -
 "  "
 "  "
A value of the equal to one reflects complete home bias while a value
of zero indicates perfect diversification according to the CAPM. A negative value is
associated with an underrepresentation of home assets in the portfolio.
Table 4 shows the in the state bond portfolios of banks that hold some
investment in state bonds (by banking group for 2014Q2, excluding banks with zero
holdings). On average, state-owned banks exhibit the largest home bias with a value of
0.19. Savings and cooperative banks have a home bias in state bond portfolios of 0.07
and 0.08 respectively. Mortgage banks are fully diversified, arguably reflecting their
sophisticated investment strategies in government bond markets. However, the variation
within banking groups is large which renders the home bias insignificant at
conventional levels (Table 4). One reason for this may be the impact of the states' fiscal
situation on the banks' home bias. The empirical approach tests this hypothesis, among
others, and controls for unobserved differences between states and / or between banks
that may drive the descriptive figures.
18
4 Empirical methodology and results
4.1 Empirical methodology
To test for moral suasion, I employ heterogeneity between banks with respect to state
ownership, within banks with respect to bond holdings from home versus other state
issuers and between states over time with respect to the Stability Council indicators. I
extend the methodology of existing studies by De Marco and Macchiavelli (2016),
Horváth et al. (2015), Koetter and Popov (2017), and Ongena et al. (2016) in two
dimensions.
First, I analyse the impact of moral suasion on the bank's decision whether or not to
hold any bonds from a specific state (extensive margin), in addition to analysing the
volume of the bank's state bond holdings. To this end I apply a Heckman (1979) model
and fractional logit model as proposed by Papke and Wooldridge (1996). While
previous studies on moral suasion have analysed the intensive margin only (due to their
focus on large banks), governments may also use moral suasion to persuade banks to
hold asset classes that they would not hold otherwise and therefore affect the extensive
margin of banks' state bond holdings.
Second, I use not only banks' bond holdings of the home state but also that of other
states on an issuer level. This allows me to control for unobserved heterogeneity
between states over time through issuer-time dummies in the baseline specification, and
to additionally control for alternative investment incentives of banks by bank-time and
bank-issuer fixed effects in the augmented regressions (using high-dimensional fixed
effects regressions). Existing studies do not use heterogeneity within banks, but only
between banks and states over time (De Marco and Macchiavelli, 2016; Horváth et al.,
2015; Koetter and Popov, 2017; Ongena et al., 2016).
Similar to De Marco and Macchiavelli (2016), Horváth et al. (2015), and Koetter and
Popov (2017), I study banks' holdings of state bonds instead of purchases of state
bonds. This allows me to use the cross-sectional variation between the states' fiscal
condition in addition to the variation within states over time. Also, the dataset does not
allow a clear identification of flows (unlike the dataset on large European Banks by
Ongena et al., 2016). In an augmented fixed effects regression, I check that my results
19
on moral suasion are not only driven by the cross-sectional variation by including bank-
issuer fixed effects (along with bank-time and issuer-time fixed effects, Table 8).
Results from this estimation are driven by the variation over time and the findings
remain in line with moral suasion.
Heckman model
My baseline empirical approach applies a Heckman (1979) model to account for the
self-selection of banks into holding state bonds. Buch et al. (2016) apply a similar
approach to studying German banks' holdings of OECD government bonds. The model
proceeds in two steps. First, it analyses the bank's decision whether to hold bonds from
state j in quarter q using a probit model (selection equation, i.e. extensive margin). And
second, if yes, it analyses the bank's decision on how much to hold (outcome equation,
i.e. intensive margin). The inverse Mills ratio (IMR) calculated from the predicted
likelihood of observing an exposure of bank i in state j at quarter q in the first stage
corrects for self-selection of banks. In this set-up, the selection equation (1) and
outcome equation (2) are specified as follows:
1 Pr = 1 = 
  
2 =
  
Where EXPijq
is an indicator variable equal to one if bank i (2,024 German banks)
holds government bonds issued by a specific state j (16 states) at the end of quarter q
(quarterly data from Q4:2005 to Q2:2014) and zero otherwise. gives the
corresponding log amount of banks i's bond holdings of state j at quarter q. (.) is the
standard normal distribution function.
The variable homeij
is an indicator variable that is equal to one if the issuer state is
the state where the bank's headquarters is located. If a bank has more than one
20
headquarters (in the case of a few Landesbanken), I treat all headquarters locations as
home states.
The main variable of interest is the interaction effect of the home indicator with bank
variables and/or issuer specific variables   . These interactions
give bank-issuer-time specific variables that allow testing for the moral suasion
hypothesis. In the baseline specification in Table 6, the "home" indicator is interacted
with an issuer-specific variable, the number of Stability Council criteria that a state
breaches ("breaches of stability criteria") to test for the moral suasion hypothesis part
(I).20 In Section 4.2.2, the term is additionally interacted with the bank specific variable
on state ownership ("state-owned") to test for the second part of the moral suasion
hypothesis. All underlying (two-way) interaction effects are included for correct
interpretation but usually not reported for the sake of brevity.
Since in principle all banks are able to hold home state debt and moral suasion may
affect the extensive as well as the intensive margin, there is no obvious exclusion
restriction for the Heckman model. Instead, it is identified based on functional form and
on differences in the set of included dummies. The coefficient  on the IMR is
significant in all specifications, confirming that it is important to control for self-
selection of banks into holding state debt. Differences between state issuers over time,
such as differences in placement activity or economic conditions, are controlled for by
issuer-time fixed effects in the outcome equation; only the differential effect
between home and out-of-state banks can thus be identified.21 The selection equation
includes one-way issuer and time dummies only in order to avoid the incidental
parameters problem in probit estimations.
At the same time, I control for the impact of bank-time specific variables that capture
different business models of banks and variations in banks' demand for state bonds over
time. These bank-specific control variables Xiq-1
are lagged by one quarter and include
20 As assessments by the Stability Council are available only from 2010Q4 onwards, all specifications
include an indicator equal to one from 2010Q4 onwards (and interaction effects with this indicator are
included where appropriate). While this is necessary to correctly interpret the interaction effects with the
variable "Breaches of stability criteria", it is generally not reported for the sake of brevity. In a robustness
test, I exclude the period before the establishment of the Stability Council in 2010Q4.
21 The baseline impact of issuer-time variables could not be identified even in the absence of issuer-time
fixed effect since, by construction, an increase in holdings of one bank has to result from a decrease in
holdings from other banks (controlling for the amount outstanding and abstracting from non-bank or
foreign investors which are of minor relevance in this market).
21
total assets, capitalization, deposit ratio, commitment ratio and a non-performing loan
indicator. I control for mergers between banks using an indicator that is equal to 1 for
the surviving bank in the quarter of the merger. The indicator is significantly positive in
most specifications, reflecting a size effect for the surviving bank, and is not reported.
For more information on the bank mergers and exits, see Section 3.1. Summary
statistics of the variables are given in Table 5.
Fractional logit and fixed effects regressions
The Heckman specification studies the impact of moral suasion on banks' state bond
holdings in absolute terms. Moral suasion behavior might also be reflected in large
bond holdings of home state-owned banks relative to the outstanding state bonds. This
approach focuses on the state's creditor structure and captures diversification in a state's
investor base (Asonuma et al., 2015).
In an alternative specification I therefore use the bank's state bond holdings relative
to the outstanding amount on an issuer level as the dependent variable. Since it is a
proportion and does include a corner solution (i.e. the value zero), I use the pooled
fractional logit model as proposed by Papke and Wooldridge (1996). The advantage of
the fractional logit which uses the logistic link function is that it is fairly robust against
misspecification (Papke and Wooldrige, 1996). The explanatory variables are specified
as in Equation (1). Due to the incidental parameters problem in non-linear models, I do
not include issuer-time dummies in these specifications. In a robustness check, I
introduce one-way issuer and time dummies, which are less problematic as there are
many banks per issuer and time (Papke and Wooldridge, 2008). Standard errors are
clustered on the issuer-time level to account for the fact that the shares of banks in
outstanding state bonds are negatively correlated.
I cross-check the results of the fractional logit model with ordinary least squares
(OLS) regressions that do not account for the bounded nature of the dependent variable
but can provide a good approximation (Papke and Wooldridge, 2008). Also, OLS
regressions allow for the inclusion of high dimensional fixed effects and offer a
straightforward interpretation of parameters as marginal effects(Papke and Wooldridge,
2008). Specifically, I use issuer-time, bank-time and bank-issuer fixed effects to control
for unobserved heterogeneity between and within banks and the structural preference of
22
a bank for a specific state (identification through heterogeneity following Khwaja and
Mian, 2005). The dependent and independent variables are the same as in the fractional
logit case except that the dependent variable is multiplied by 100 (i.e. given in %) to
transform the scale of the estimated coefficients. This specification allows me to
identify the bank-issuer-time specific moral suasion effect.
4.2 Main Results
4.2.1 Differences between home and out-of-state banks
Results of the baseline Heckman model are shown in Table 6; for both specifications
the first column gives the outcome equation and the second column the selection
equation of the Heckman model. Column 3 includes two-way fixed effects at the issuer-
time level that captures the heterogeneity at the state level such as differences in funding
strategies of states and in economic conditions as well as events that are common to all
states such as changes in the bund yield. Column 4 of Table 6 gives marginal effects for
the selection equation to ease the economic interpretation of the coefficients.
The main results are threefold. First, home banks hold significantly more bonds
issued by the state than out-of-state banks. Quantitatively, the volume of bond holdings
is by about 49% larger if the bank is located in the issuer state (column 3).
Second, and in support of the moral suasion hypothesis, the state's fiscal condition
has an opposite effect on the state bond holdings of home versus out-of-state banks. The
latter hold fewer bonds issued by states that breach criteria of the Stability Council (see
negatively significant parameter on "Breaches of stability criteria" in column 1). Home
banks however hold more bonds if the home state breaches criteria of the Stability
Council (see positively significant parameter on the interaction effect of "Home *
Breaches of stability criteria" in columns 1 and 3). In fact, banks increase their home
state bond holdings by 16% for each stability criterion that the home state breaches
(column 3). Similarly, home banks are more likely to hold bonds when the state
breaches stability criteria (column 4), while out-of-state banks tend to avoid exposure in
these situations (column 2). This is in line with an effect of moral suasion on the
extensive margin of banks' state bond holdings.
23
Third, Table 6 shows that bank characteristics matter in explaining banks' state bond
holdings. Not surprisingly, there is a scale effect, as larger banks tend to hold more state
bonds (in line with Buch et al., 2016, and Acharya and Steffen, 2015). Better capitalized
banks, measured as balance sheet equity over unweighted assets, hold fewer state bonds.
An increase in capitalization by one percentage point decreases the volume of bonds
held by 5% (column 3). This might reflect lower incentives for well-capitalized banks
(measured in unweighted terms) to load up on zero risk-weighted assets to support their
regulatory capital ratio and is in line with findings by Acharya and Steffen (2015) for
European banks. Contrary to the intuition that banks with a large deposit base rely less
on state bonds as collateral for wholesale funding (Buch et al., 2016), I find that high
deposit ratios are associated with higher state bond holdings of banks. One explanation
could be that deposit-funded banks are more risk-averse and therefore favour
comparatively safe assets such as German state bonds. This matches the result that
riskier banks in terms of having a comparatively high non-performing loans ratio (upper
quartile) hold fewer state bonds. The parameters on bank control variables remain very
similar in all regressions and are therefore no longer reported in the following tables.
4.2.2 The impact of state ownership
This Section gives results on the impact of state ownership on banks' state bond
holdings using a Heckman model in Table 7 and a fractional logit model as well as a
high-dimensional fixed effects model in Table 8. All specifications include a set of bank
control variables as specified in Table 6 (not reported) and control for unobserved
heterogeneity at the issuer-time level (Table 7), at the issuer and time level (column 2 of
Table 8) and at the issuer-time, bank-time and bank-issuer level (column 3 of Table 8).
The results from Tables 7 and 8 support the moral suasion hypotheses (part I and II)
developed in Section 2.1. Home banks that are directly owned by the state are
significantly more invested in their home state than other home banks. Column 1 of
Table 7 shows that state bond holdings of state-owned home banks are about 89%
higher than those of other home banks. Also, state-owned home banks hold a higher
share of outstanding bonds compared to other home banks (columns 1 and 2 of Table
8).
24
In line with moral suasion, state-owned home banks hold even more home state
bonds when the state breaches some criteria of the Stability Council (see positively
significant parameter on "Home * State-owned * Breaches of stability criteria" in
Tables 7 and 8). In economic terms, state-owned banks hold a 14% larger amount of
home state bonds than other home banks and than state-owned banks from other states
per breach of stability criteria (column 3 of Table 7). Relative to the outstanding amount
of home state bonds, the share of state-owned banks in states that breach a stability
criterion is 29 percentage points higher than the share of other home banks or state-
owned banks from other states (column 3 of Table 8). Also, state-owned banks are more
likely to hold home state bonds in these situations (column 4 of Table 7).
The underlying two-way interaction effect ("State-owned * Breaches of stability
criteria" in column 3 of Table 7) shows that state-owned banks generally hold more
bonds from states that breach stability criteria, not only from the home state. In terms of
magnitude though, the effect is only one-third of the incremental home effect for state-
owned banks (5% compared to 14%) and it is insignificant on the extensive margin.
These findings suggest that moral suasion plays an important role in the decision of
state-owned banks to hold any home state bonds when fiscal conditions are weak.
After controlling for the special role of state-ownership, home and out-of-state banks
differ less in their holdings of bonds issued by weak states which is consistent with the
hypothesis that moral suasion is more effective on state-owned banks (part II of the
moral suasion hypothesis). In fact, the difference between home and out-of-state banks
that are not state-owned becomes insignificant on the extensive margin of state bond
holdings (column 4 of Table 7) and in the fractional logit model (columns 1 and 2 of
Table 8).
Hence, home banks have larger holdings of home state bonds if the bank is directly
owned by the state government and the state is breaching criteria of the Stability
Council. Column 3 of Table 8 shows that this finding remains significant after
controlling for unobserved heterogeneity at the bank-time level (e.g. time-varying
demand of a bank for state bonds), at the issuer-time level (e.g. time-varying differences
in issuing strategies or economic and fiscal conditions between states) and at the bank-
issuer level (e.g. bank-specific preferences for the home state or for a particular issuer).
25
I find that home state-owned banks increase their state bond holdings more than other
home banks or state-owned banks located in other states when the fiscal condition of the
home state deteriorates (in terms of the number of stability criteria that are breached).
Overall, the results are in line with moral suasion of home state-owned banks by state
governments.
Discussion of endogeneity concerns
One potential concern is that state ownership might be endogenous to banks'
holdings of state bonds if ownership by states is conditional on the importance of a bank
for state funding. Several arguments mitigate this concern in this case. First, my
baseline approach uses only the extensive margin of state ownership, i.e. an indicator
whether a bank is owned by the state or not. State ownership of regional development
banks and Landesbanken is a structural characteristic of the German banking system
that persisted for a long time (De Marco and Macchiavelli, 2016). In contrast, banks
adjust their state bond holdings frequently. It is thus unlikely that state ownership is a
function of banks' state bond holdings.
Second, regional development banks are fully state-owned and their debt is
guaranteed by the state such that further increases in the intensity of state ownership
conditional on state bond holdings are not possible.
Third, I test for moral suasion using a restricted sample period from 2010 onwards
(see Section 4.3.1). This smaller sample excludes the financial crisis, during which
some Landesbanken have suffered large losses to their wholesale activities and have had
to be recapitalized by their owners, i.e. the states and the savings banks associations
(Puri et al., 2011). Excluding the financial crisis eliminates all changes in the state
ownership indicator making it pre-determined for the subsequent sample. Results on
moral suasion remain robust.
Finally, to further corroborate this argument, I test whether weakly capitalized state-
owned banks hold more home state bonds presumably to increase bailout probability
(see Section 4.3.2 and column 1 of Table 13). I find that capitalization has no significant
effect on home state bond holdings of state-owned banks. In fact, highly capitalized
state-owned banks generally hold more state bonds, irrespective of the issuer.
26
The intensity of state control
Based on these arguments, I extend the analysis beyond the binary state ownership
indicator and account for differences in the intensity of government control within the
group of state-owned banks (for descriptive statistics, see Table 2). Table 9 gives the
results from a Heckman model using a sample of state-owned banks only in columns 1
to 3 and on 39 large banks (including the 23 state-owned banks) in column 4 for which
data on supervisory board members could be gathered. Bank control variables (as
specified in Table 6) and issuer-time dummies are included.
State-owned banks hold more bonds issued by the home than by other states (column
1 of Table 9) but this preference for home bonds is smaller for banks that are owned by
more than one state (column 2 of Table 9). The latter result is in line with a stronger
influence of political agents that are homogenous. Column 3 of Table 9 shows that the
degree of state ownership matters. Banks hold more home state bonds if a larger share
of bank equity is owned by the home state. Finally, banks with a larger share of state
politicians in their supervisory boards also hold more home state bonds. To sum up, the
preference for home state bonds increases with the degree of state control over a bank.
4.3 Additional results
4.3.1 Robustness tests
My main findings remain robust to different measures for a state's fiscal situation,
different computation methods of standard errors, to constraining the sample to the
period after the introduction of the Stability Council, and to excluding city states.
Table 10 shows results from the intensive margin of a Heckman model using
alternative measures for a state's fiscal condition. Columns 1 to 4 of Table 10 use the
structural net lending / borrowing, the credit funding ratio, the interest expense to tax
income ratio and the outstanding state debt respectively. In contrast to the composite,
baseline measure "breaches of stability criteria", these indicators measure the fiscal
strength of each state on a continuous scale and thus address the concern that the
findings rely on relatively few breaches only. All four fiscal measures confirm the
findings on moral suasion from the baseline results: state-owned banks hold more home
bonds than other home banks or state-owned banks located in other states, if the home
27
state is in a weak fiscal condition (columns 1 to 4 of Table 10). Furthermore, the
information whether a state breaches the stability criteria has explanatory power for
banks' state bond holdings even after controlling for the state debt burden (column 5 of
Table 10). This supports the use of my baseline fiscal measure.
In the baseline estimations, I use heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors. The idea
behind this is that banks decide whether they want to invest in a particular state bond or
not without having a binding portfolio constraint. The portfolio constraint is alleviated
since German state bonds can be used as collateral with the Eurosystem or in the
interbank market to obtain additional funding. If, however, banks target a fixed size of
their total state bond portfolio, the decision to invest in a particular bond depends on all
other state bonds. As a result, a bank's bond holdings might be correlated between
states. In a robustness test I allow for this by clustering on the bank-time level and
results remain robust (column 1 of Table 11). Furthermore, if banks hold state bonds
until maturity, there is persistence in state bond holdings over time. In column 2 of
Table 11, I therefore cluster on the bank-issuer level and find that parameter estimates
remain similar but standard errors increase and thus effects become insignificant.22
Next, assessments of stability criteria are only available after the introduction of the
Stability Council. In my baseline specifications, I account for this through interaction
effects with an indicator that is equal to one from the establishment of the Stability
Council onwards. Results are also robust against excluding the period before the
Stability Council (column 3 of Table 11).
Finally, I test whether my results are driven by state-owned banks located in the so-
called "city states" (i.e. Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg). These states are special since
they consist of cities only. If their fiscal situation is structurally weaker due to larger
expenditures per capita and if, at the same time, state-owned banks in these states are
large relative to the outstanding volume of state bonds, banks located in city states
might be driving my results. However, columns 4 and 5 of Table 11 show that the
findings on moral suasion remain nearly unchanged when I exclude banks located in
city states or restrict the sample to banks from city states respectively. More generally,
my findings cannot be explained by large banks that happen to be located in weak
22 Due to lower degrees of freedom, I do not include any fixed effects in this specification but follow the
baseline specification from column 1 of Table 6.
28
states, since my results hold after controlling for bank-issuer unobserved heterogeneity
in Table 8.
4.3.2 Alternative hypotheses
Besides moral suasion, the theoretical literature suggests further incentives for banks
to invest in home government debt which I address below.
First, banks might hold more home government bonds in order to shift risks from
bank owners to debtors (Ari, 2016) or taxpayers (Farhi and Tirole, 2016). In the model
of Farhi and Tirole (2016), weak banks load up on risky home sovereign debt in order to
maximize the value of the "bailout put", i.e. the taxpayers' money that banks can extract
in a bailout. While asset classes other than German state bonds seem more apt to engage
in risk taking, the bailout probability of a bank may increase with home government
bond holdings as long as the bailout capacity of the government is sufficient (Farhi and
Tirole, 2016). In fact, Koetter and Popov (2017) show that German savings banks are
more likely to receive a bailout when they have higher holdings of home state bonds.
Therefore, Table 12 tests whether weakly capitalized banks or "high credit risk" banks
have higher holdings of home government bonds, especially in fiscally weak states.
Bank capitalization is measured as capital over unweighted assets to ensure that it is not
affected by the zero risk weights of state bonds. "High credit risk" banks are banks in
the upper quartile of the non-performing loan ratio distribution in the respective year.
I do not find evidence for the hypothesis on increasing bailout probability, since bank
capitalization and credit risk does not significantly affect the bank's home state bond
holdings (columns 1 and 3 of Table 12 respectively). Furthermore, well capitalized
banks - not weakly capitalized banks - have larger bond holdings when the state
breaches stability criteria, irrespective of whether it is the home or another state (see
significantly positive coefficient on "Capitalization (%) * Breaches of stability criteria"
and insignificant coefficient on "Home * Capitalization (%) * Breaches of stability
criteria" in column 2 of Table 12). This result is in line with findings by Ongena et al.
(2016) on large European banks from countries experiencing a sovereign debt crisis.
Focusing on home government debt only, they show that well capitalized banks ­ not
weakly capitalized banks ­ lend more when the government is faced with a high
funding need.
29
Overall, after controlling for bank riskiness, my results remain in line with moral
suasion as reflected in the positively significant parameter on the interaction effect
"Home * State-owned * Breaches of stability criteria" in columns 2 and 4 of Table 12.
Second, I test whether state-owned banks hold more home state bonds when their
capitalization (measured as bank equity over unweighted assets) is low. The idea behind
this is that lowly-capitalized banks could engage in political endearing by financing the
home state and thereby increase the likelihood of being bailed out. As discussed in
Section 4.2.2 and due to direct state ownership or full-fledged state guarantees (for
development banks), the incentives for state-owned banks to engage in such behavior
should be lower than for savings banks that may need to bridge a political gap (Koetter
and Popov, 2017). Still, I check whether weakly capitalized state-owned banks drive my
results and find that the level of a state-owned bank's capitalization does not
significantly affect its home state bond holdings (see insignificant coefficient on
"Home * State-owned * Capitalization (%)" in column 1 of Table 13). Generally, highly
capitalized state-owned banks hold more (home and other) state bonds (see positive
coefficient on "State-owned * Capitalization (%)"). In this respect, state-owned banks
do not differ from the average German bank that shows no sign of risk-shifting through
state bonds (Table 12).
Third, the lack of good private lending opportunities rather than moral suasion could
be behind banks' large home state bond holdings in times of weak fiscal conditions (for
a theoretical model, see Gennaioli et al., 2014). Since the home economy is likely to be
in a bad state when fiscal fundamentals are weak, home government bonds may be used
to store liquidity for future profitable lending opportunities (Gennaioli et al., 2014). In
column 2 of Table 13, I test whether German banks hold more home state bonds when
their lending to the private sector is low (i.e. their claims on banks and non-banks
relative to total assets are low). Contrary to the lending opportunity hypothesis though,
banks with a higher loan ratio hold more home than other state bonds.
One explanation for this finding might be that state-owned banks expand their
private lending activities in weak fiscal situations in order to fulfil their mandate to
promote the economic and social development within their home state. At the same
30
time, these banks may also increase their holdings of home government bonds in weak
fiscal situations to support the state government that is in need of funding.
Furthermore, a preference for home over foreign assets has often been explained by
information asymmetries (Portes et al., 2001). Information costs for the regional
government bond market are likely to be higher than for the federal government level
given the absence of a rating for 5 out of 16 German states (Q4:2013) and the lower
availability of macroeconomic and fiscal data. When testing for the impact of
information asymmetries between home and out-of-state banks, I make use of the
establishment of the Stability Council in 2010. Column 3 of Table 13 shows that an
increase in public information through the establishment of the Stability Council
reduced the home preference only in "sound" states. In "weak" states the home effects
gets larger when negative information is available through the publications of the
Stability Council (the positive significant parameter on "Home * Breaches of stability
criteria" is larger than the negative parameter on "Home * Stability Council"). Out-of-
state banks have lower state bond holdings in these situations. Hence, while potential
information advantages of home banks are reduced through the publications of the
Stability Council, home banks in weak states hold more state bonds than out-of-state
banks.
Finally, since my analysis is on the regional instead of the national level, I can
exclude two other hypotheses that have been suggested in the literature: banking
supervision (Farhi and Tirole, 2016) and redenomination risk (Battistini et al., 2014).
German state governments do not have any bank supervisory powers that they could use
to increase home bias. And while the perceived risk of a break-up of the euro area might
have driven the home bias at the national level in European sovereign debt markets
(Battistini et al., 2014), this would not have introduced redenomination risk in the
German subnational state government bond market.
All in all, after testing for alternative hypotheses, evidence remains in line with moral
suasion by state governments on home state-owned banks.
31
5 Conclusion
This study tests the hypothesis that governments use moral suasion on home (state-
owned) banks to hold home government debt in the context of the German regional
government bond market. Thereby, it makes use of differences in the states' fiscal
condition as measured by the stability criteria of the German Stability Council as well
as differences in bank location and ownership. This paper is complementary to recent
cross-country studies on moral suasion and mitigates differences in the institutional and
regulatory framework by focusing on the regional level. The empirical methodology
controls for self-selection of banks into holding state bonds and uses the variation in
state bond holdings between banks and within banks across different issuers over time
to control for alternative incentives of banks to hold (home) state bonds.
The main findings are the following. Home banks are more likely to hold home state
bonds and hold a significantly larger volume of these bonds if the home state breaches
criteria of the Stability Council. In contrast, banks located in other states (out-of-state
banks) hold fewer state bonds in this situation. Banks directly owned by the state
government (i.e. Landesbanken and regional development banks) have larger home state
bond holdings than other home banks and state-owned banks located in other states.
Within the group of state-owned banks, the preference for home state bonds is larger if
the state owns a larger share of the bank's equity and if there are more state politicians
on the supervisory board. Finally, state-owned banks that are located in states that
breach criteria of the Stability Council hold more home state bonds than their
counterparts in fiscally sound states. These results are in line with moral suasion by
state governments on home state-owned banks.
The findings remain after controlling for bank characteristics such as size,
capitalization, deposit ratio and credit risk, for unobserved time-varying heterogeneity at
the issuer level, and for several alternative hypotheses such as risk-shifting by banks
(Farhi and Tirole, 2016), information asymmetries (Portes et al., 2001) or alternative
lending opportunities (Gennaioli et al., 2014). The results are robust to using different
empirical models, different measures of fiscal strength and controlling for unobserved
time-varying heterogeneity at the issuer and at the bank level and time-constant
heterogeneity at the bank-issuer level.
32
My findings have implications for risk-sharing between German states. I find that
state-owned banks hold more bonds issued by (home and other) states that breach the
criteria of the Stability Council. While the effect is largest for home state bonds, it is
significantly positive for other states as well. As a result, exposures of state-owned
banks may introduce another channel of contagion between German states beyond the
institutional channels such as the fiscal equalization scheme. For the European context,
Kirschenmann, Korte and Steffen (2016) show that banks' cross-border exposures
increase correlation between default risks of sovereigns.
Finally, soft borrowing constraints for regional governments are a major issue in
federal unions, including Germany (Baskaran, 2012). The publications of the German
Stability Council can reinforce fiscal discipline if bond market participants take
differences in the states' fiscal strength into account. Indeed, I find that out-of-state
banks that are not state-owned hold fewer bonds from states that breach criteria of the
Stability Council. However, home (state-owned) banks hold more state bonds in these
situations and thereby potentially mitigate market discipline. The research on the role of
market discipline in federal systems (Heppke-Falk and Wolff 2008; Lemmen, 1999)
could benefit from taking the heterogeneity in the investment incentives of market
participants into account.
33
References
Acharya, V. V., Drechsler, I., and Schnabl, P. (2014). A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts
and Sovereign Credit Risk. Journal of Finance, 69(6), pp. 2689-2739.
Acharya, V. V., and Steffen, S. (2015). The "Greatest" Carry Trade Ever?
Understanding Eurozone Bank Risks. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(2),
pp. 215-236.
Acharya, V. V., Eisert, T., Eufinger, C., and Hirsch, C. W. (2016). Real Effects of the
Sovereign Debt Crisis in Europe: Evidence from Syndicated Loans. Available at
SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2612855
Altavilla, C., Pagano, M., and Simonelli, S. (2016). Bank Exposures and Sovereign
Stress Transmission. ECB Working Paper No. 1969. Frankfurt am Main:
European Central Bank.
Ari, A. (2016). Sovereign Risk and Bank Risk-Taking. ECB Working Paper No. 1894.
Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank.
Asonuma, T., Bakhache, S., and Hesse, H. (2015). Is Banks' Home Bias Good or Bad
for Public Debt Sustainability?. IMF Working Paper 15/44. Washington:
International Monetary Fund.
Bade, M., Flory, J., and Schönberg, T. (2016). SHS-Base, Data Report 2016-02 -
Metadata Version 1-1. Deutsche Bundesbank Research Data and Service Centre.
Baskaran, T. (2012). Soft budget constraints and strategic interactions in subnational
borrowing: Evidence from the German States, 1975-2005. Journal of Urban
Economics, 71(1), pp. 114-127.
Basu, S. S. (2009). Sovereign Debt and Domestic Economic Fragility. IMF Research
Department. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Battistini, N., Pagano, M., and Simonelli, S. (2014). Systemic risk, sovereign yields and
bank exposure in the euro crisis. Economic Policy, 29(78), pp. 203-251.
Becker, B., and Ivashina, V. (2017). Financial Repression in the European Sovereign
Debt Crisis. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP12185.
Broner, F., Erce, A., Martin, A., and Venture, J. (2014). Sovereign Debt Markets in
Turbulent Times: Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-Out Effects. Journal of
Monetary Economics, 61, pp. 114-142.
Brutti, F., and Sauré, P. (2014). Repatriation of Debt in the Euro Crisis: Evidence for
the Secondary Market Theory. SNB Working Papers 3/2014. Zurich: Swiss
National Bank.
Buch, C., Koetter, M., and Ohls, J. (2016). Banks and Sovereign Risk: A Granular
View. Journal of Financial Stability, 25, pp. 1-15.
34
Chari, V. V., Dovis, A., and Kehoe, P. J. (2016). On the Optimality of Financial
Repression. FED Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 1000.
Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank.
De Marco, F., and Macciavelli, M. (2016). The Political Origin of Home Bias: The Case
of Europe. FEDS Working Paper No. 2016-060. Washington: Federal Reserve
System.
Dinc, I. S. (2005). Politicians and Banks. Political Influence on Government-Owned
Banks in Emerging Markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 77, pp. 453-479.
Farhi, E., and Tirole, J. (2016). Deadly Embrace: Sovereign and Financial Balance
Sheet Doom Loops. NBER Working Paper No. 21843. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gennaioli, N., Martin, A., and Rossi, S. (2014). Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks and
Financial Institutions. Journal of Finance, 69, pp. 819-866.
Gertler, M., and Kiyotaki, N. (2010). Financial intermediation and credit policy in
business cycle analysis. Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3(3), pp. 547-599.
Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica,
47(1), pp. 153-161.
Heppke-Falk, K. H., and Wolff, G. B. (2008). Moral Hazard and Bail-Out in Fiscal
Federations: Evidence for the German Laender. KYKLOS, 61(3), pp. 425-446.
Horváth, B. L., Huizinga, H., and Ioannidou, V. (2015). Determinants and Valuation
Effects of the Home Bias in European Banks' Sovereign Debt Portfolios. CEPR
Discussion Paper No. DP10661. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Khwaja, A. I., and Mian, A. (2005). Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms?
Rent Provision in an Emerging Financial Market. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(4), 1371-1411.
Kirschenmann, K., Korte, J., and Steffen, S. (2016). The Zero Risk Fallacy ­ Banks'
Sovereign Exposure and Sovereign Risk Spillovers. Mimeo.
Koetter, M. (2013). Market structure and competition in German banking. German
Council of Economic Advisors Working Paper 06/2013. Wiesbaden:
Sachverstaendigenrat zur Begutachtung der Gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung.
Koetter, M., and Popov, A. (2017). Politics, Banks, and Sovereign Debt: Unholy Trinity
or Divine Coincidence?. Mimeo.
Lemmen, J. (1999). Managing Government Default Risk in Federal States. ESRC
Research Centre Financial Markets Group Special Paper 116. London: London
School of Economics.
35
Ongena, S., Popov, A., and van Horen, N. (2016). The invisible hand of the government
"Moral suasion" during the European sovereign debt crisis. ECB Working Paper
Series No. 1937. Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank.
Ospina, R., and Ferrari, S. L. P. (2012). A general class of zero-or-one inflated beta
regression models. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 56(6), pp. 1609-
1623.
Papke, L. E., and Wooldrigde, J. M. (1996). Econometric Methods for Fractional
Response Variables with an Application to 401 (K) Plan Participation Rates.
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11, pp. 619-632.
Papke, L. E., and Wooldrige, J. M. (2008) Panel data methods for fractional response
variables with an application to test pass rates. Journal of Econometrics, 145, pp.
121-133.
Popov, A., and van Horen, N. (2015). Exporting Sovereign Stress: Evidence from
Syndicated Bank Lending During the Euro Area Sovereign Debt Crisis. Review of
Finance, 19(5), pp. 1825-1866.
Portes, R., Rey, H., and Oh. Y. (2001). Information and Capital Flows: The
Determinants of Transactions in Financial Assets. European Economic Review,
45(4­6), pp. 783-796.
Puri, M., Rocholl, J., and Steffen, S. (2011). Global retail lending in the aftermath of the
US financial crisis: Distinguishing between supply and demand effects. Journal of
Financial Economics, 100(3), pp. 556-578.
Reinhart, C., Kirkegaard, J., and Sbrancia, B. (2011). Financial repression redux.
Finance and Development, 48(2), pp. 22-26.
Romans, J. T. (1966). Moral Suasion as an Instrument of Economic Policy. The
American Economic Review, 56(5), pp. 1220-1226.
Sapienza, P. (2004). The effects of government ownership on bank lending. Journal of
Financial Economics, 72, pp. 357-384.
Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. (1994). Politicians and Firms. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109(4), pp. 995-1025.
Schulz, A., and Wolff, G. B. (2008). The German sub-national government bond
market: evolution, yields and liquidity. Bundesbank Series 1 Discussion Paper
No. 2008,06. Frankfurt am Main: Deutsche Bundesbank.
Weidmann, J. (2013). Weidmann in sovereign debt warning. Financial Times, 30
September 2013. Retrieved from: http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/557fe8be-29f2-
11e3-9bc6-00144feab7de.html.
36
Data Appendix
List of state-owned banks
This list gives the names of German banks that are directly owned by a state government (fully or only
a fraction of bank equity) and are included in my analysis as "state-owned".
Bayerische Landesbank
Bremer Aufbau-Bank
Bremer Landesbank
Hamburgische Investitions- und Foerderbank (prev: Hamburgische
Wohnungsbaukreditanstalt)
HSH Nordbank
Investitions- und Strukturbank Rheinland-Pfalz (ISB)
Investitionsbank Berlin
Investitionsbank des Landes Brandenburg
Investitionsbank Schleswig-Holstein
Landesbank Baden-Wuerttemberg
Landesbank Berlin (until 2007; then owned by savings association)
Landesbank Hessen-Thueringen
Landesbank Saar
Landesbank Sachsen (until 2008, then susidiary of LBBW)
Landeskreditbank Baden-Wuerttemberg
LfA Foederbank Bayern
Norddeutsche Landesbank
NRW.Bank
Saarlaendische Investitionskreditbank
Saechsische Aufbaubank
Thueringer Aufbaubank
WestLB (until mid 2012; then Portigon as legal sucessor)
Landestreuhandbank Rheinland-Pfalz (until end 2011; then merged with ISB
Rheinland-Pfalz)
37
Definitions of variables and data sources
Sovereign bond portfolios
Exposure to issuer state EXP: a dummy variable which is equal to one if the bank i
holds bonds issued by state j in quarter t and zero otherwise. The information is based
on the Securities Holdings Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
State Bond Holdings SOV: notional value of a bank's state bond holdings of state j in
quarter t. Data are obtained from the Securities Holdings Statistics of the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Individual security data are aggregated to the issuer state level by
summing up overall ISINs per state, bank and quarter. Only state bonds held on banks'
own accounts are included, covering both the banking book and the trading book.
Political economy variables
Home: a dummy variable which is equal to one if the bank's headquarters is located in
the issuer state. If a bank has more than one headquarters (in the case of a few
Landesbanken), I treat all headquarters locations as home states. But results are robust
to defining just one headquarters following the bank supervisory database. The
information is based on bank supervisory data of the Deutsche Bundesbank and
Bloomberg.
State-owned: a dummy variable which is equal to one if the bank is directly owned by a
state. These include some Landesbanken and state development banks. For a complete
list of state-owned banks see Appendix A1. Information is taken from supervisory data
on bank ownership and from public homepages of banks.
State-level variables
State debt: state debt per capita (in thd euro). All debt instruments including bonds and
loans are included. Only debt associated with the core budget ("Kernhaushalt") is
considered. Additional budgets ("Extrahaushalt") contain spending related to bad banks
and public enterprises that would distort my analysis. The information is collected from
the German Federal Statistical Office and in annual frequency.
State bonds outstanding: volume of outstanding state bonds per issuer (in mn eur). The
information is collected from the German Ministery of Finance and in annual frequency.
Stability Council: a dummy variable which is equal to one after the introduction of the
German Stability Council in the first quarter of 2010.
Breaches of stability criteria: the number of stability criteria that are breached according
to the German Stability Council. This ordinal variable ranges from zero to eight. The
Stability Council assesses four criteria in the following two dimensions: current
budgetary situation (covering the current and last two years) and future fiscal planning
(covering the next four years). Criteria include structural net lending/borrowing (per
capita), credit funding ratio (i.e. net borrowing to fiscal budget) (%), interest expense to
tax income ratio (%) and outstanding debt (per capita). The information is collected
from the annual online publications (in German) of the German Stability Council. For
more information on the Stability Council, see
http://www.stabilitaetsrat.de/EN/Home/home_node.html.
38
Bank-level variables
Balance sheet total: log of total assets (in thsd euro) of the bank. Data are taken from
the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of the Deutsche Bundesbank. It is a measure for
bank size.
Capitalization: ratio of equity capital (= subscribed capital + reserves - published
losses) to total assets (in %), obtained from the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of the
Deutsche Bundesbank. This variable reflects the risk-bearing capacity of banks.
Commitments ratio: ratio of commitments (= contingent liabilities + placing and
underwriting commitments + irrevocable lending commitments) to total assets plus
commitments (in %) obtained from the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of the
Deutsche Bundesbank.
Deposit ratio: ratio of overnight deposits from household and non-financial firms to
total assets (in %) obtained from the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics of the Deutsche
Bundesbank.
Loan ratio: ratio of claims on banks and non-banks (= loans + advances, including
received bills) to total assets (in %) obtained from the Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics
of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
NPL (4th quartile): an indicator equal to one if bank is in the 4th quartile of the ratio of
non-performing loans to total loans (in %) in the respective year as obtained from the
annual financial statements submitted to the Deutsche Bundesbank. To account for the
statistical breaks in prudential definitions of NPL, I use this relative NPL indicator
instead of comparing NPL ratios over time.
39
Tables and Figures
Figure 1: Funding structure of German states
This Figure shows the decomposition of the aggregate outstanding debt of German states by debt
type (i.e. bonds, loans from banks and other debt) over time. Data are taken from Deutsche
Bundesbank.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
bn euro
Other debt
Loans from banks
Bonds
40
Figure 2: Heterogeneity between states in the fiscal indicators
This Figure shows the distribution of four fiscal indicators over time using boxplots. The upper (lower) hinge of the
box shows the 75th (25th) percentile of the distribution. The median is indicated by the horizontal line within a box
and the lines give the upper and lower adjacent values respectively. Outside values are not shown. The upper left
panel shows the interest expense to tax income (in %), the upper right panel the state debt level Per Capita (in thsd
euro), the lower left panel the credit funding ratio (i.e. net borrowing to fiscal budget, in %) and the lower right panel
the structural net borrowing Per Capita (in thsd euro). Data are collected from the public reports by the Stability
Council that can be accessed at http://www.stabilitaetsrat.de/EN/Home/home_node.html.
5 10 15 20 25
Interest expense to tax income (in %)
2010q4 2011q4 2012q4 2013q4
0 5 10 15 20
State debt PC (in thsd euro)
2010q4 2011q4 2012q4 2013q4
-10 0 10 20 30
Credit funding ratio (in %)
2010q4 2011q4 2012q4 2013q4
-.5 0 .5 1
Structural net borrowing PC (in thsd euro)
2010q4 2011q4 2012q4 2013q4
41
Table 1: Assessments by the German Stability Council
This Table shows the variation in assessments of the German Stability Council between states, i.e. the variation in the
variables "breaches of stability criteria". Columns give the number of stability criteria that are breached by the issuer
state. The variable ranges from zero to eight, i.e. four criteria in two dimensions each (current fiscal situation and
future budgetary planning). Criteria include structural net lending/borrowing (per capita), credit funding ratio (%),
interest expense to tax income ratio (%) and outstanding debt (per capita). Each observation in the Table gives the
assessment of one year. For each state there are four observations, i.e. annual assessments of the Stability Council
from 2010-2013.
Number of stability criteria that are breached
Issuer 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Baden-Wuerttemberg 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Bavaria 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Berlin 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 0
Bremen 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3
Hamburg 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hesse 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lower Saxony 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Northrhine-Westphalia 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Rhineland Palatinate 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Saarland 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3
Schleswig Holstein 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
Mecklenburg Western Pomerania 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Brandenburg 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Saxony-Anhalt 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Thuringia 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Saxony 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total (=64) 35 11 5 1 2 2 0 2 6
42
Table 2: Intensity of state government control over state-owned banks
This Table shows descriptive statistics for the intensity of state government control over state-owned
banks. The first row shows the share of bank capital owned by the state (in %). The subgroup of regional
development banks are fully state-owned, which is shown in italics in the second row. The following
rows report the owners of state-owned banks other than the state governments. Other proxies for the
intensity of state control are an indicator variable on whether the bank is owned by more than one state
and the share of state politicians on the supervisory board (in %). Column 3 gives the share of the
respective banks in the total assets of the German banking system (in %). For instance, banks that are
owned by several states account for 9.12% of the banking system's assets. The Table shows unweighted
averages for the 20 state-owned banks at the second quarter of 2014.
(1) (2) (3)
Mean Std
Size of banks in %
of banking system
assets
Share owned by state (in %) 83.17 25.88 16.96
Other owners of state-owned banks
Savings association (in %) 10.68 20.58
Other public banks (in %) 2.84 12.24
Other (in %) 3.31 7.82
Owned by several states (1/0) 0.20 0.41 9.12
State politicians on supervisory board (in %) 44.00 25.00
43
Table 3: German banks' government bond portfolios
This Table shows the importance of state bonds in the government bond portfolios of German banks. Unweighted
averages within each banking group are reported. The group of cooperative banks include the head institutions.
Column 1 shows total assets in bn euro, Columns 2 and 3 the overall government bond portfolio and Columns 4
and 5 holdings of German central government bonds. Columns 6 and 7 give the state bonds holdings per banking
group. Column 8 shows the number of banks per banking group. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre
(RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, own
calculations, 1,732 banks as of Q2:2014. Data are for the second quarter of 2014.
Total
assets
(TA)
Government bond
portfolio (Gov PF)
German central
government bond
holdings
German state bond
holdings
No of
banks
bn euro bn euro
in % of
TA
bn euro
in % of
Gov PF
bn euro
in % of
Gov PF
No
Commercial banks 15.69 0.54 3% 0.02 5% 0.25 46% 167
State-owned banks 63.54 5.13 8% 0.17 3% 2.06 40% 20
Savings banks 2.65 0.11 4% 0.00 3% 0.06 57% 417
Cooperative banks 0.97 0.04 4% 0.00 1% 0.01 33% 1,076
Mortgage banks 24.67 3.26 13% 0.01 0% 0.66 20% 17
Other MFI 29.39 1.03 3% 0.00 0% 0.42 41% 35
All banks 4.33 0.21 3% 0.01 3% 0.09 41% 1,732
44
Table 4: Home bias in banks' state bond portfolios
This Table shows descriptive statistics on the home bias in banks' state bond portfolios measured as
HomeBias_it=1-(The group of cooperative banks include the head institutions. Share of foreign
state bonds in portfolio_it)/(Share of foreign bonds in German state bond markets_t ). Column 1
gives the mean of the home bias measure in the respective banking group, Column 2 the standard
deviation and Column 3 the number of banks in each banking group. Banks that do not have any
state bond holdings in 2014 Q2 are exlcuded because the home bias is not defined in these cases.
Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities
Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, own calculations, 933 banks. Data are for
the second quarter of 2014.
(1) (2) (3)
Bank type Home bias No of banks
mean sd
Commercial banks 0.02 0.22 72
State-owned banks 0.19 0.29 19
Savings banks 0.07 0.30 319
Cooperative banks 0.08 0.33 486
Mortgage banks 0.00 0.18 16
Other MFI 0.14 0.28 21
All banks 0.08 0.31 933
45
Table 5: Descriptive statistics for Heckman model estimations
This Table shows in Panel A descriptive statistics for the dependent variables in selection and outcome
equation and in Panel B the complete observations of issuer-specific variables in the selection and the
outcome equations. Panel C shows the descriptive statistics for bank variables. The variables are defined in
the Appendix A2. The variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8)
that a state breaches in the respective year as reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of
all variables, see data appendix. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own
calculations, 2,024 banks (unbalanced), and 16 issuer states. I include the 25th and 75th percentile of
variables for the outcome equation in order to better assess the magnitude of the estimated coefficients in
the outcome equation.
Selection
equation
Outcome equation
1,031,203 89,171
Mean Stdv Mean Stdv p25 p75
Panel A: Dependent variables
Holding bonds issued by state j (dummy) 0.09 0.28
Volume held of bonds issued by state j (ln) 15.97 1.74 14.73 16.99
Volume held of bonds issued by state j (euro bn) 0.05 0.22 0.00 0.02
Panel B: State-specific variables
State bonds outstanding 13.81 16.35 27.14 22.15 9.16 34.75
State debt (thd euro PC) 8.61 7.43 9.45 9.66 6.08 9.00
Stability Council 0.41 0.49 0.55 0.50
Breaches of stability criteria 0.68 1.86 0.65 1.51
Home 0.06 0.24 0.12 0.33
Panel C: Bank-specific variables
Balance sheet total (ln) 13.18 1.59 14.62 2.04 13.25 15.52
Capitalization (%) 6.37 5.78 5.13 2.62 4.07 5.92
Deposit ratio (%) 26.53 12.94 23.64 15.19 12.50 34.60
Commitment ratio (%) 5.21 3.62 5.64 4.05 3.12 6.99
NPL (4th quartile) 0.25 0.43 0.21 0.41
46
Table 6: Differences between home and out-of-state banks
This Table shows regression results for estimating the determinants of banks' investments in state bonds
using a Heckman model. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings of state j is the dependent variable in
the outcome equation. An indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds bonds of state j is the
dependent variable in the selection equation. An indicator that is equal to one from the introduction of the
Stability Council onwards is included (stand-alone and interacted with home indicator) but not reported.
The variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state
breaches in the respective year as reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all
variables, see data appendix. Fixed effects are included as specified in the lower part of the Table. The
inverse Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection. Data
sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings
Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own calculations. Marginal effects
for the extensive margin are reported in Column 4. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% level. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Intensive
margin
Extensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Extensive
margin
(Marginal
Effects)
Home 0.317*** 0.323*** 0.485*** 0.025***
(0.025) (0.010) (0.029) (0.001)
State bonds outstanding 0.032*** 0.022***
(0.001) (0.000)
Breaches of stability criteria -0.008*** -0.015***
(0.003) (0.001)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.152*** 0.013 0.155*** 0.002**
(0.016) (0.008) (0.019) (0.001)
Balance sheet total (ln) 1.022*** 0.322*** 1.195*** 0.027***
(0.017) (0.001) (0.021) (0.000)
Capitalization (%) -0.033*** -0.025*** -0.049*** -0.002***
(0.002) (0.001) (0.003) (0.000)
Deposit ratio (%) 0.007*** 0.007*** 0.010*** 0.001***
(0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)
Commitment ratio (%) -0.037*** -0.007*** -0.040*** -0.001***
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000)
NPL (4th quartile) -0.116*** -0.049*** -0.140*** -0.004***
(0.010) (0.005) (0.011) (0.000)
Constant -1.724*** -6.276*** -4.844***
(0.392) (0.025) (0.458)
Observations 89,171 1,031,203 89,171 1,031,203
FE No No Issuer-Time Issuer, Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 1.379 1.994
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0698 0.0810
47
Table 7: Differences between state-owned and other banks
This Table shows regression results for estimating the determinants of banks' investments in state bonds using a
Heckman model and distinguishing between state-owned and other banks. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings
of state j is the dependent variable in the outcome equation. An indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds
bonds of state j is the dependent variable in the selection equation. The variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures
the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the respective year as reported by the German Stability
Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix. Fixed effects and bank control variables are included as
specified in the lower part of the Table. The inverse Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and
corrects for self-selection. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own calculations. ***, **
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Baseline Split by Stability Council assessment
Intensive
margin
Extensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Extensive
margin
Extensive
margin
(Marginal
Effects)
Home 0.452*** 0.296*** 0.444*** 0.295*** 0.024***
(0.029) (0.010) (0.029) (0.010) (0.001)
State-owned bank -0.269*** 0.074*** -0.378*** 0.072*** 0.006***
(0.031) (0.016) (0.041) (0.021) (0.002)
Home * State-owned bank 0.886*** 0.386*** 0.852*** 0.455*** 0.037***
(0.095) (0.060) (0.120) (0.073) (0.006)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.092*** -0.004 -0.000
(0.021) (0.010) (0.001)
State-owned * Breaches of stability criteria 0.047*** 0.013 0.001
(0.017) (0.009) (0.001)
Home * State-owned * Breaches of stability
criteria 0.135** 0.115*** 0.009***
(0.053) (0.030) (0.002)
Constant -4.983*** -6.189*** -4.699*** -6.191***
(0.464) (0.030) (0.457) (0.030)
Observations 89,171 1,031,203 89,171 1,031,203 1,031,203
Bank control variables Y Y Y Y Y
FE
Issuer-
Time
Issuer,
Time
Issuer-
Time
Issuer,
Time Issuer, Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 2.002 1.950
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0821 0.0808
48
Table 8: Alternative empirical approaches
This Table shows regression results for estimating the determinants of banks' investments in state bonds relative to
outstanding state bonds using fractional data response models and fixed effects regressions. The proportion of state
bond holdings relative to the outstanding state bonds is the dependent variable in Columns 1 and 2 and multiplied
by 100% in Columns 3. The variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8)
that a state breaches in the respective year as reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all
variables, see data appendix. Fixed effects, underlying interaction effects and bank control variables are included as
specified in the lower part of the Table. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own
calculations. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the
issuer-time level are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3)
Fractional logit Fractional logit OLS regression
Proportion
including zeros
Proportion
including zeros
Proportion (in %)
including zeros
Home 0.299*** 0.509***
(0.082) (0.088)
Home * State-owned bank 0.744*** 0.661***
(0.116) (0.121)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.010 0.003 0.006***
(0.049) (0.042) (0.001)
State-owned * Breaches of stability criteria 0.081*** 0.087*** 0.046***
(0.013) (0.014) (0.013)
Home * State-owned * Breaches of stability criteria 0.120** 0.109*** 0.285***
(0.049) (0.042) (0.029)
Constant -21.496*** -21.721***
(0.144) (0.163)
Observations 1,029,507 1,029,507 1,036,067
Bank control variables Y Y Y
FE No Issuer, Time
Issuer-Time;
Bank-Time;
Bank-Issuer
Interactions effects Y Y Y
R-squared 0.366
49
Table 9: Intensity of government control on state-owned banks
This Table shows regression results for estimating the impact of state control on banks' state bond holdings using
a Heckman model. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings of state j is the dependent variable in the outcome
equation. An indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds bonds of state j is the dependent variable in
the selection equation. For the sake of brevity, only the results from the intensive margin are reported. The
variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the
respective year as reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix.
Fixed effects and bank control variables are included as specified in the lower part of the Table. The inverse Mills
ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection. Only state-owned banks are
included in columns 1 to 3; column 4 additionally includes 39 large banks for which supervisory board
information was collected for the years 2013 and 2014. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC)
of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­
Q2:2014, own calculations, except for Column 4 which covers Q1:2013 to Q2: 2014. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Baseline
Multiple state
owners
Intensity of
state
ownership
Supervisory
board
membership
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Home 1.157*** 1.776*** 0.625*** 0.653***
(0.085) (0.120) (0.125) (0.187)
Owned by several states 1.073***
(0.075)
Home * Owned by several states -1.026***
(0.159)
Intensity of state ownership -0.246***
(0.093)
Home * Intensity of state ownership 0.959***
(0.190)
State politicians in supervisory board (%) -2.010***
(0.338)
Home * State politicians in supervisory board
(%) 2.690***
(0.584)
Constant -1.857 -2.858** 0.912 12.752***
(1.345) (1.258) (1.214) (1.012)
Observations 3,965 3,965 3,965 1,561
Bank control variables Y Y Y Y
FE Issuer-Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 0.984 1.500 0.668 1.522
Standard deviation of IMR 0.139 0.133 0.128 0.269
50
Table 10: Robustness tests using different measures for the states' fiscal situation
This Table shows robustness results from a Heckman model using different measures for the fiscal situation of
states. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings of state j is the dependent variable in the outcome equation. An
indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds bonds of state j is the dependent variable in the selection
equation. For the sake of brevity, only the results from the intensive margin are reported. Columns 1-4 give the
results for the structural net lending / borrowing, the credit funding ratio, the interest expense to tax income ratio
and the outstanding state debt respectively as fiscal variables on the issuing state. Data for these variables are taken
from the publications of the Stability Council and thus are available for 2010Q4 - 2014Q2 only. Column 5 uses
outstanding state debt as provided by statistical offices and is thus available for the entire sample period. The
variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the
respective year as reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix.
Issuer-time fixed effects, bank control variables and all necessary two-way interaction effects are included. The
inverse Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection. Data sources:
Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly
Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own calculations, in Columns 4-5 and the period from Q4:2010 to
Q2:2014 in Columns 1-3 due to data availability. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.
Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Fiscal variables
Structural net
lending/borrowing
Credit
funding
ratio
Interest
expense
to tax
income
ratio
Outstanding
state debt
(thd eur
PC)
Outstanding
state debt
(thd eur
PC)
Intensive margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Home 0.612*** 0.611*** 0.410*** 0.364*** 0.361***
(0.042) (0.037) (0.064) (0.029) (0.031)
Home * State-owned bank 0.630*** 0.575*** 0.153 0.879*** 0.797***
(0.146) (0.148) (0.291) (0.127) (0.147)
Home * Fiscal variable -0.001*** -0.040*** 0.003 0.011*** 0.009***
(0.000) (0.005) (0.006) (0.003) (0.003)
State-owned bank * Fiscal variable 0.000*** 0.022*** 0.025*** 0.027*** 0.026***
(0.000) (0.006) (0.008) (0.003) (0.003)
Home * State-owned bank * Fiscal
variable 0.003*** 0.133*** 0.101*** 0.023** 0.006
(0.000) (0.018) (0.024) (0.011) (0.012)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.081***
(0.021)
Home * State-owned * Breaches of
stability criteria
0.121**
(0.053)
Constant -3.177*** -3.113*** -2.954*** -3.889*** -4.020***
(0.496) (0.493) (0.492) (0.435) (0.443)
Observations 48,803 48,803 48,803 89,171 89,171
Bank control variables Y Y Y Y Y
Interaction effects Y Y Y Y Y
FE Issuer-Time
Issuer-
Time
Issuer-
Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 1.627 1.613 1.585 1.803 1.827
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0899 0.0893 0.0890 0.0770 0.0784
51
Table 11: Robustness tests
This Table shows robustness results for estimating the determinants of banks' investments in state bonds using a
Heckman model. The log of bank i's bond holdings of state j is the dependent variable in the outcome equation. An
indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds bonds of state j is the dependent variable in the selection
equation. For the sake of brevity, only the results from the outcome equation are reported. The variable "breaches of
stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the respective year as reported
by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix. Fixed effects, bank control
variables and all necessary interaction effects are included as specified in the lower part of the Table. The inverse
Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection. Data sources: Research Data
and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet
Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own calculations, except for in Column 3 where it covers Q1:2010 to Q2:2014. ***,
** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time level in
Column 1 and at the bank-issuer level in Column 2 using a bootstrap technique. In Column 3 robust standard errors
are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Std errors
clustered
at bank-
time level
Std
errors
clustered
at bank-
issuer
level
Since
Stability
Council
Excluding
city states
Only city
states
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Home 0.437*** 0.274*** 0.404*** 0.480*** 0.121
(0.026) (0.088) (0.030) (0.031) (0.141)
Home * State-owned bank 0.833*** 0.762 0.808*** 0.612*** 0.371
(0.120) (0.545) (0.119) (0.146) (0.256)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.092*** 0.112* 0.073*** 0.012 -0.133**
(0.019) (0.060) (0.019) (0.026) (0.061)
Home * State-owned * Breaches of stability
criteria 0.140*** 0.024 0.156*** 0.137* 0.281***
(0.041) (0.171) (0.044) (0.072) (0.091)
Constant -4.617*** -1.615 -2.587*** -5.955*** 3.761***
(0.587) (1.255) (0.487) (0.519) (1.157)
Observations 89,171 89,171 48,803 83,456 5,715
Bank control variables Y Y Y Y Y
Interaction effects Y Y Y Y Y
FE
Issuer-
Time No
Issuer-
Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 1.932 1.341 1.532 2.088 0.909
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0804 0.0693 0.0882 0.0906 0.210
52
Table 12: Testing the risk-shifting hypothesis
This Table shows regression results from a Heckman model for testing whether banks' investments in state bonds
can be explained by the risk shifting hypothesis. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings of state j is the
dependent variable in the outcome equation. For the sake of brevity, only the results from the outcome equation are
reported. The inverse Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection.
Column 1 and 2 analyse the impact of banks' capital ratio and Column 3 and 4 the impact of a banks' non
performing loans ratio on its state bond holdings decisions. The variable "breaches of stability criteria" captures the
number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the respective year as reported by the German Stability
Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix. Issuer-time fixed effects, bank control variables and all
necessary two-way interaction effects are included. Data sources: Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014,
own calculations. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. Robust standard errors are
shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Capitalization NPL Ratio
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Intensive
margin
Home 0.428*** 0.394*** 0.541*** 0.457***
(0.046) (0.045) (0.025) (0.031)
Home * Capitalization (%)
0.005 0.003
(0.005) (0.007)
Capitalization (%) * Breaches of stability
criteria
0.015***
(0.001)
Home * Capitalization (%) * Breaches of
stability criteria
-0.005
(0.010)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria
0.104* 0.087***
(0.058) (0.024)
Home * State-owned * Breaches of
stability criteria
0.159*** 0.136***
(0.053) (0.053)
Home * NPL (%) -0.052 -0.080*
(0.034) (0.047)
NPL (%) * Breaches of stability criteria
0.032***
(0.008)
Home * NPL (%) * Breaches of stability
criteria
0.008
(0.041)
Constant -4.400*** -4.874*** -4.832*** -4.493***
(0.451) (0.460) (0.456) (0.451)
Observations 89,171 89,171 89,171 89,171
Bank control variables Y Y Y Y
Interaction effects Y Y Y Y
FE Issuer-Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time Issuer-Time
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 1.889 1.997 1.996 1.916
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0797 0.0815 0.0809 0.0800
53
Table 13: Testing for alternative explanations
This Table shows regression results for testing alternative hypotheses on banks' investments in state bonds using a
Heckman model. The log of bank i's sovereign bond holdings of state j is the dependent variable in the outcome
equation. An indicator equal to one when observing that bank i holds bonds of state j is the dependent variable in
the selection equation. For the sake of brevity, only the results from the outcome equation are reported. Column 1
tests whether banks' capitalization (i.e. equity over unweighted assets) affects the holdings of state-owned banks.
Column 2 tests the hypothesis that banks hold home state bonds to store liquidity for future lending opportunities.
The loan ratio is defuned as claims on banks and non-banks relative to total assets. Column 3 tests for information
asymmetries where Stability Council is an indicator equal to one from 2010 onwards. The variable "breaches of
stability criteria" captures the number of stability criteria (0-8) that a state breaches in the respective year as
reported by the German Stability Council. For a definition of all variables, see data appendix. Fixed effects, bank
control variables and underlying interaction effects are included as specified in the lower part of the Table. The
inverse Mills ratio (IMR) is obtained from the extensive margin and corrects for self-selection. Data sources:
Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Securities Holdings Statistics and Monthly
Balance Sheet Statistics, Q4:2005 ­ Q2:2014, own calculations. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% level. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
(1) (2) (3)
Capitalization of
state-owned banks
Other lending
opportunities
Information
asymmetries
Intensive margin Intensive margin Intensive margin
Home 0.436*** 0.157** 0.317***
(0.036) (0.062) (0.025)
Home * State-owned 1.150***
(0.170)
State-owned * Capitalization (%) 0.151***
(0.010)
Home * State-owned * Capitalization (%) -0.000
(0.030)
Loan ratio -0.033***
(0.001)
Home * Loan ratio 0.003***
(0.001)
Home * Breaches of stability criteria 0.165*** 0.152***
(0.015) (0.016)
Breaches of stability criteria -0.008***
(0.003)
Home * Stability Council -0.061**
(0.028)
Stability Council 0.213***
(0.016)
Constant -4.900*** 1.534*** -1.724***
(0.458) (0.269) (0.392)
Observations 89,171 89,171 89,171
Bank control variables Y Y Y
Interaction effects Y Y Y
FE Issuer-Time Issuer-Time No
Inverse Mills ratio (IMR) 2.012 1.230 1.379
Standard deviation of IMR 0.0815 0.0558 0.0698
