Williams, S.R., & McDade, T.W. (2009). The use of dried blood spot sampling in the national social life, health, and aging project. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences,
64B(S1), i131­i136, doi:10.1093/geronb/gbn022.
© The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Gerontological Society of America.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
i131
DRIED blood spots (DBSs)--drops of capillary whole
blood collected on filter paper from a simple prick of
the finger--provide a minimally invasive alternative to ve-
nous blood sampling that facilitates the collection of blood
samples in home-based settings, by nonmedically trained
personnel. Although the advantages of DBS in terms of
sample collection, transport, and storage are substantial, care
should be taken when using data obtained from DBS, as they
are not identical to results obtained by more commonly ap-
plied methods using serum or plasma samples (McDade,
Williams, & Snodgrass, 2007). DBSs are one of the 13 direct
biological measures (biomeasures) collected in the National
Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP). These
measures, which also include weight, waist circumference,
height, blood pressure, smell, saliva collection, taste, a self-
administered vaginal swab for female respondents, "Get Up
and Go," distance vision, touch, and oral mucosal transudate
(Orasure®) HIV test, were collected for analysis of mea-
sures associated with physiological functioning. The collec-
tion of biomeasures in conjunction with questionnaire items
allows for the investigation of the interaction between the
social, psychological, and environmental domains and their
impact on health. The object of this paper is to provide per-
tinent information on the collection, transport, and labora-
tory analysis of DBS samples in NSHAP to promote the
appropriate use of data derived from these samples.
Methods
In order to minimize participant burden and to maximize
participation, the NSHAP interview and biomeasure collec-
tion process was designed to be completed in approximately
2 hr. To stay within these time constraints and still obtain
the maximum amount of information, it was necessary to
modularize the design of the survey. As a result, approxi-
mately 5/6 of NSHAP participants (2,494) were asked to
provide blood spots. Of those asked, 84.5% (2,105) agreed.
However, due to collection difficulties, blood spots were not
collected from an additional 57 individuals who originally
agreed to participate. As a result, DBSs were collected from
a total of 2,048 individuals. Because of the variability in
volume of blood available for analysis, the sample size for
each analyte obtained from blood spots varies. A list of ana-
lytes obtained and the sample size for each analyte is listed
in Table 1.
DBS Collection Protocol
Blood spots were collected from free-flowing capillary
blood obtained by finger stick. The protocol is as follows:
1. Angle Respondent's hand below his/her lap.
2. Warm finger and stimulate circulation by gently
kneading and squeezing the appropriate finger.
The Use of Dried Blood Spot Sampling in the National
Social Life, Health, and Aging Project
Sharon R. Williams1 and Thomas W. McDade2
1Department of Sociology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.
2Department of Anthropology and Cells to Society (C2S): The Center on Social Disparities and Health at the Institute for Policy
Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
Objectives. This paper describes the methods used for and issues associated with collection and analysis of dried blood
spot (DBS) samples for the National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project and provides the basic distributions of the
resulting analytes.
Methods. DBSs from capillary finger sticks were collected by nonmedically trained interviewers from 2,044 individu-
als, aged 57­85 years. The quality and quantity of DBS samples were evaluated to allow for analysis of interviewer per-
formance. Levels of C-reactive protein, antibodies to the Epstein­Barr virus, hemoglobin, and glycosylated hemoglobin
were assayed using various analytic methods.
Results. Cooperation rate for DBS collection was 84.5%, with 99% of the cards yielding enough sample for at least
one analysis. The distribution, mean, and standard deviation of the analytes obtained from DBSs are also presented in this
paper.
Conclusions. The high cooperation rate and quality of the spots collected suggest that the collection of DBSs in
population-based research is a feasible and viable alternative to venous blood draws. The relative ease of sample collec-
tion, transport, and storage are significant benefits. Care should be taken, however, when comparing results from analysis
of DBS samples with those obtained from serum or plasma samples.
Key Words: Biomeasures--Dried blood spots--Aging.
WILLIAMS AND MCDADE
i132
3. Ask Respondent to gently shake his/her hand a few
times.
4. Wipe the index finger of the right hand with alcohol
swab and wait a few seconds for the alcohol to dry
(DO NOT blow on finger, wave hand, etc. to speed up
drying).
5. Squeeze the finger just below the area to be pricked.
6. Firmly prick finger in the fleshy part of the pad, just
off the center.
7. IMMEDIATELY dispose of the lancet into the sharps
container.
8. Allow blood to well on tip of finger.
9. If necessary, apply gentle pressure below the site of
the prick.
10. Place first drop in discard circle of filter paper--
marked D.
11. Place three (if possible) additional drops on filter pa-
per.
12. DO NOT reblot the circles on the filter paper (except
discard circle).
13. If unable to fill three spots (+ discard spot), prick an-
other finger. Place first drop in discard circle of filter
paper (marked D) and place additional drops in re-
maining circles.
14. If necessary, ask Respondent to hold cotton ball on
finger and apply pressure until bleeding stops.
15. Offer Respondent a bandage.
After collection of the blood spots, field interviewers
(FIs) were instructed to record in the computer the number
of blood spots collected and finger pricks attempted and to
set the filter paper aside and allow the blood spots to dry for
the remainder of the interview. At the end of the interview,
the FI was instructed to flip the cover of the filter paper over
the blood spots and place the filter paper in a plastic bag
with a desiccant pack. Upon returning home, the blood
spots were removed from the bag and allowed to air dry
overnight. They were then returned to the bag and stored at
4°C until shipped.
Field Interviewer Training
The majority of FIs used for data collection in NSHAP
did not have any previous medical training. However, most
of them did have previous experience in field interviewing.
FIs were brought to a central location, in three groups, for 8
days of training. FIs were trained in preventing disease
transmission and the use of universal precautions as well as
the specific techniques necessary for blood spot collection.
Although one of the key benefits of this method of blood
collection is the minimal risk to both the participant and the
collector, every effort was made to train the interviewers to
minimize their exposure to potential risks. Further, only
single-use safety lancets were used to prevent exposure to
used lancet blades, FIs were well supplied with alcohol
pads, and all materials were collected in biohazard and
sharps containers and properly disposed.
Basic techniques in the use of lancets, the proper posi-
tioning of the finger stick, and proper application of the
blood to the card were demonstrated to FIs in small groups
during the larger NSHAP training. Individual FIs were then
given time to practice on themselves and each other under
the supervision of experienced training personnel. Addi-
tional time with training personnel was available for those
who needed extra training. On the final day of training, each
FI was required to demonstrate adequacy in blood spot col-
lection before training was considered complete.
Continual feedback on the quality of spots was also pro-
vided to the FIs throughout the study period. As the blood
spots were received in the laboratory for analysis, the num-
ber, quality, and condition of the spots was recorded by
trained personnel. If consistent problems with collection
were observed for a single FI, he or she was contacted to
discuss potential problems and techniques that could be
used to improve the quality of the blood spot collection.
Key issues in the collection of DBSs.--Sample volume is
a key issue in the usability of blood spots for biomeasure
analysis. In order to obtain the maximum amount of blood,
FIs were instructed to allow large drops of blood to pool on
the finger before dropping them onto the filter paper with
the goal of filling each of the five premarked circles entirely.
Analysis of DBSs typically requires that either a 3.2-mm or
a 6.0-mm disk of dried blood be punched out of the filter
paper. A full drop of blood provides sufficient sample for
either a 1- to 6.0-mm disk of dried blood or up to 7- to 3.2-
mm disks. Smaller volumes collected means less sample is
available for analysis. Further, proper techniques used for
promoting blood flow were stressed during training. The
idea that "some people just don't bleed well" was discour-
aged, and FIs were taught that with proper technique--in-
cluding having the individual rigorously shake his/her hand
before the stick and firmly pressing the lancet to the finger
for maximum contact with the blade--five drops of blood is
possible from almost anyone.
In addition to volume, it is necessary that the blood be
collected appropriately to ensure that the blood is absorbed
evenly across the filter paper. This ensures that the analyte
of interest is evenly distributed across the blood spot. It is
necessary, therefore, for the blood to be freely dropped onto
the filter paper. If the finger is touched to the filter paper or
blood is blotted onto the filter paper, the blood cannot flow
evenly across the paper matrix and the spot is not usable for
Table 1. Analytes Obtained From Dried Blood Spots
Analyte Sample Size
C-reactive protein 1,940
Epstein­Barr virus antibody titers 1,981
Hemoglobin 1,859
HbA1c 1,739
DRIED BLOOD SPOT ANALYSIS IN NSHAP i133
most analyses. Further, if more than one drop is applied to
the same area of the filter paper and the spots are doubled or
overlapping, these spots are also unusable for most analy-
ses. Upon careful examination of the spots, those that have
been blotted or double spotted will appear asymmetric.
Only spots that appear symmetric and circular on both sides
of the filter paper are appropriate for most analyses. The
exceptions to these general guidelines are spots that will be
used for DNA extraction or for other analyses where quan-
tification of the analyte in question is not necessary. A more
detailed discussion of important issues in the collection and
use of DBSs can be found in McDade et al. (2007).
After drying, the blood spots were refrigerated until ship-
ment to the laboratory for analysis. DBSs were shipped in
batches to the laboratory every 2 weeks. Shipment within
the United States of blood (including blood spots, plasma,
and serum) requires samples to be labeled and shipped as
"diagnostic specimens." These samples must be packed
with enough absorbable material to collect any sample leak-
age and packed in a sealed, leak-proof bag or container.
This container must be packed inside an additional sealed
container clearly marked as diagnostic specimens on the
outside of the package. Diagnostic specimens can be shipped
through commercial carriers or through standard U.S. mail
when correctly packaged (contact the United States Depart-
ment of Transportation [USDOT] or commercial shipper for
details). Upon arriving in the laboratory, blood spot cards
were catalogued, analyzed for quantity and quality, and fro-
zen at -25°C until analysis.
Collection Results
There were no significant differences between individu-
als who agreed to provide blood spots and those who re-
fused with respect to gender, race, ethnicity, age, education,
income, or marital status. There was also no difference be-
tween the two groups with respect to self-reported mental or
physical health or the number of doctor visits reported by
the participants. However, the experience of the FI did have
an impact on the percentage of their participants who re-
fused to provide blood spots. Of the 131 FIs, the average
success rate (measured by percentage of total number of
subjects asked who agreed to provide a DBS) was 84. How-
ever, interviewers had significantly higher response rates if
they had more than 2 years of survey experience (82% vs.
86%). Neither the race of the FIs nor the age of the FIs,
relative to the age group of the NSHAP participants, was
associated with their success rate.
Individuals who refused to participate in blood spot col-
lection reported various reasons for doing so. However,
these responses followed a few general themes. Of the 158
refusal responses noted, 25% refused because of a reported
medical condition, most commonly due to blood thinners,
recent blood work, or daily glucose checks due to diabetes.
Of the remaining refusals, 20% reported unease with
potential pain, fear of needles, or dislike of blood, and 17%
reported that they (or in three cases a family member) did
not think providing blood was appropriate or believed the
measure was too invasive or dangerous.
DBS sample quality.--Each card contains five preprint-
ed circles of standard size (1/2-inch diameter) for suggest-
ed collection. Interviewers in this study were instructed to
blot the first drop on the filter paper in the rightmost circle.
This spot will not be used for analysis and is not described
in the current paper. Remaining spots are counted and
measured (in relation to the size of punches possible), and
any obviously blotted or double dropped spots are noted.
Both individual spots and entire cards will be described.
Spots are considered to be too small if they are not large
enough to allow for a single small (3.2 mm) hole punch.
Spots are considered good if they will allow for a single
large (6 mm) hole punch. Spots are considered excellent if
they fill the entire circle. For the purposes of the NSHAP
study, one large and three small punches are required for
analysis of proposed biomarkers. Cards are considered to
be inadequate if they cannot support the necessary punch-
es, adequate if they will support only the required punches,
and excellent if they will support more than the required
amount of punches. Statistical analysis in the following
section was completed using STATA 9.2 (StataCorp, Col-
lege Station, TX). A summary of DBS card quantity and
average quantity of blood collected by each FI is presented
in Table 2.
Blood Spot Analysis
Biomarkers for analysis from DBSs in NSHAP were se-
lected based on several criteria, including availability of a
valid assay, cost, and relative value of the measure with re-
spect to the objectives of the survey. Analytes quantified in
NSHAP DBS samples include C-reactive protein (CRP),
antibodies to the Epstein­Barr virus (EBV), hemoglobin,
and HbA1c. In most cases, there was more sample collected
than used, allowing for the potential future use of these
DBSs for more analyses. The consent process was designed
with this in mind, and participants were asked for permis-
sion to store their DBS samples for future use. The majority
of participants, 86%, agreed to allow storage of any remain-
ing sample for future use. Many additional analytes have
been obtained from DBS, and improvements in technology
may result in new analyses or methods for analyses. How-
ever, length of storage and stability of a new analyte must be
Table 2. DBS Card Quality
Card Quality % of Total Cards % Average by
Field Interviewer
Usable (1 punch) 98.6 100.0
Acceptable (4 punches) 88.8 100.0
Good (10 punches) 56.4 66.0
Excellent (20 punches) 13.6 3.3
WILLIAMS AND MCDADE
i134
considered before any future analyses. A comprehensive list
of potential DBS analytes, available protocols, validity, and
stability are available in McDade et al. (2007). Unless oth-
erwise noted, all assays were conducted in the Laboratory
for Human Biology Research at Northwestern University
(Evanston, IL).
CRP.--CRP is an acute-phase protein and a nonspecific
marker of inflammation. CRP has been used as a marker of
immune activation (McDade, Burhop, & Dohnal, 2004) as
well as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (Smith et al.,
2004). Although CRP is correlated with other biological in-
dicators of health, it is independently related to cardiovas-
cular risk, even when accounting for age, smoking, blood
pressure, and diabetes and lipids (Koenigh, Sund, Frohlich,
& Fischer, 1999; Pai, Pischon, Ma, & Manson, 2004; Ridker,
2003; Ridker Cushman, Stampfer, Tracy, & Hennekens,
1997; Ridker, Rifai, Rose, Buring, & Cook, 2002). CRP
values were assayed using an enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay (ELISA) protocol previously developed for use
with DBS (McDade et al., 2004). Validation studies indicate
that the blood spot CRP method has a lower detection limit
of 0.028 mg L-1 and a high correlation between matched
plasma and blood spot samples. These matched samples can
be used to convert DBS results to plasma/serum equivalents
using the linear regression equation reported in McDade
et al. (2004).
However, care should be taken when comparing DBS
values with plasma or serum values, as the relationship
will vary across analytic methods and may vary by popu-
lation (e.g., Shirtcliff, Reavis, Overman, & Granger,
2001). As reported in Pearson et al. (2003), the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has recently
recommended classifications of cardiovascular risk as de-
rived from CRP values. Plasma or serum CRP values >10
mg L-1 are presumed to represent the presence of acute,
active infection and should be excluded from analyses
that are using CRP as an indicator of chronic, low-grade
inflammation. Based on the relationship between DBS
and plasma/serum CRP values evaluated as part of the
DBS CRP assay validation, a DBS value of 8.6 mg L-1
corresponds to a plasma/serum value of 10 mg L-1. Dis-
tribution of CRP levels in the NSHAP sample are pro-
vided in Table 3.
EBV antibody.--EBV is a ubiquitous human herpes virus
that may cause mononucleosis, although most primary
infections are asymptomatic. EBV is present in at least 90%
of humans, although rates of seropositivity are lower among
younger individuals and in more affluent populations. Once
infected, an individual carries the virus for his or her entire
life (Callan, 2004). Although most individuals remain
asymptomatic, EBV has also been linked to chronic fatigue
syndrome and some lymphomas (Thompson & Kurzrock,
2004). Increased levels of psychosocial stress have been
associated with viral activation due to reductions in cell-
mediated immune function, and measuring antibodies to
EBV therefore provides an indirect measure of an aspect of
cell-mediated immune function (Glaser et al., 1991, 1993).
Levels of immunoglobulin G antibody to the viral capsid
antigen complex of the EBV were determined using an
ELISA protocol previously validated for use with DBS
(McDade, Stallings, & Worthman, 2000). Distribution of
EBV levels in the NSHAP sample are provided in Table 4.
HbA1c.--Glucose is a sugar molecule that circulates in
blood until it is used by cells for energy. Effective control
over glucose concentrations is important for health, and high
blood sugar after fasting is a sign of diabetes. Hemoglobin
(Hb) is the protein that carries oxygen in the blood, contained
in red blood cells. Normally, a small percentage of the Hb
molecules in red blood cells become glycosylated (that is,
chemically linked to glucose). The percent of glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) increases over time in response to
higher concentrations of circulating glucose. HbA1c, thus,
can provide an integrated measure of blood sugar levels over
the past 2­3 months. Recent work has linked elevated HbA1c
levels to cardiovascular disease, independent of diabetes sta-
tus (see Grant et al., 2004). Here, HbA1c is used to measure
long-term blood glucose control--useful as a marker of
blood sugar regulation, and therefore of how well diabetes is
being managed, and as a marker of "prediabetes" (Yoshinaga
& Kosaka, 1996). An HbA1c level of >7% (in total Hb) is
associated with diabetes (Ford & Mokdad, 2003). According
to the 3rd wave of the National Health and Nutrition Ex-
amination Survey (NHANES III), 4.2% of the total popula-
tionhavereachedthislevelofHbA1c,whereasthepercentage
Table 3. Summary Statistics for C-reactive Protein Levels (mg L-1)
C-Reactive Protein (mg L-1) Range Mean (Weighted) SD
Men (years)
Ages 57­65 0­38.2 2.80 3.93
Ages 66­75 0.06­100 2.87 6.53
Ages 76+ 0.03­39.8 2.51 4.69
Women (years)
Ages 57­65 0­100 4.17 8.93
Ages 66­75 0­41.8 3.28 5.14
Ages 76+ 0­100 3.20 6.05
Table 4. Summary Statistics for EBV Antibody Titers
EBV Antibody Titers
(ELISA Units)
Range Mean
(Weighted)
SD
Men (years)
Ages 57­65 13.2­318.7 155 75.7
Ages 66­75 14.2­371 158 72.8
Ages 76+ 13.1­317 157 75.3
Women (years)
Ages 57­65 13.7­318 151 73.4
Ages 66­75 14.4­331 159 77.9
Ages 76+ 12.7­314 156 83.0
Note: EBV, Epstein­Barr virus; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay.
DRIED BLOOD SPOT ANALYSIS IN NSHAP i135
of those with diagnosed diabetes with >7% HbA1c is 56.4%.
In a sample of inner-city residents, Grant et al. found that
3.4% of people without diabetes had elevated HbA1c levels
(Grant et al., 2004). However, these associations have not
been demonstrated for values HbA1c levels obtained from
DBS samples. To prevent further glycosylation of hemoglo-
bin after collection on filter paper, one spot on the filter paper
was pretreated with a proprietary solution provided by Flex-
site Diagnostics (Palm City, FL). Analyses of HbA1c values
were determined at Flexsite Diagnostics using an in-house
protocol developed for the Cobas Integra blood chemistry
analyzer. Based on previous research, Flexsite reports high
correlation of results when compared with clinical standard
methods (see http://www.flexsite.com/Professional_A1c.
html for details). Distribution of HbA1c levels in the NSHAP
sample are provided in Table 5.
Hemoglobin.--Hemoglobin is the protein that carries
oxygen to the blood, contained in red blood cells. Both high
and low levels of hemoglobin signal defects in the balance
of red blood cells in the blood. Anemia, indicated by hemo-
globin deficiency, is an increasing health concern in the
United States. In older populations, anemia is an indepen-
dent risk factor for death (Lipschitz, 2003) and decline in
physical performance (Penninx et al., 2003). It is associated
with decrease in myocardial function (Penninx et al., 2003),
poor outcomes in many chronic diseases (Goodnough &
Nissenson, 2004), and muscle density (Cesari et al., 2004).
Prevalence of anemia increases with age (Penninx et al.,
2003), but estimated prevalence rates for older populations
in the United States vary widely from 3.9% to 59.9% de-
pending on the population studied and criteria used for de-
fininganemia(Beghe,Wilson,&Ershler,2004).Hemoglobin
was quantified in DBS samples using a colorimetric method
based on the conversion of hemoglobin to cyanmethemo-
globin in the presence of Drabkin's solution (O'Broin &
Gunter, 1999). Distribution of hemoglobin levels in the
NSHAP sample are provided in Table 6.
Analytical Issues
Because of the modularized design, blood spots were not
requested of all NSHAP participants, and other sections of
the survey were not completed on all individuals from which
blood spots were requested. For example, on 500 of the in-
dividuals from which blood spots were requested, no sen-
sory function or "Get Up and Go" tests were administered.
As a result, sample sizes might be significantly different for
analyses using these variables.
Care should be taken when attempting to compare values
derived from DBS samples and other sources. Although
these methods have been previously validated against clini-
cal standards, such as plasma or serum, they are not equiva-
lent to these methods, and the relationship may vary across
populations (Shirtcliff et al., 2001). The source and method
of comparison, sample size used for validation, and strength
of statistical relationship should be considered before com-
parisons are made.
Conclusions
DBS sampling was used as an alternative to venipuncture
in the NSHAP to obtain several biomeasures useful in the
assessment of health and risk for development of chronic
diseases. In most cases, this method proved to be a viable
alternative to venipuncture for both FIs and study partici-
pants, although proper and sufficient training for interview-
ers is vital to the success of this method. The feasibility of
both collection and analysis of DBS provides results that
are valid and useful in community-based studies. However,
care should be taken when using these data because these
methods are not directly comparable to clinically standard
methods. By providing these measures, we hope that when
combined with the breadth of available social measures and
self-reported measures collected in NSHAP, we are provid-
ing useful and important data to explore in an attempt to
understand health outcomes in aging adults.
Funding
The National Health, Social Life, and Aging Project (NSHAP) is sup-
ported by the National Institutes of Health--the National Institute on Ag-
ing, Office of Women's Health Research, Office ofAIDS Research, and the
Office of Behavioral and Social Science Research (5R01AG021487).
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Bjay Wilde for his assistance in compiling references.
Correspondence
Address correspondence to Sharon Williams, PhD, Department of An-
thropology, Purdue University, 700 West State Street, West Lafayette, IN
47907. Email: srw@purdue.edu
Table 5. Summary Statistics for HbA1c Levels (% of Total Hemo-
globin)
HbA1c (% of Total Hb) Range Mean (Weighted) SD
Men (years)
Ages 57­65 4.70­13.4 6.21 1.39
Ages 66­75 4.60­11.4 6.07 0.89
Ages 76+ 4.20­14.2 6.09 1.02
Women (years)
Ages 57­65 4.50­12.5 5.99 0.99
Ages 66­75 4.50­11.4 5.91 0.82
Ages 76+ 4.60­13.5 6.04 0.82
Table 6. Summary Statistics for Hemoglobin Levels (mg dL-1)
Hemoglobin (mg dL-1) Range Mean (Weighted) SD
Men (years)
Ages 57­65 8.89­18.5 13.8 1.76
Ages 66­75 7.65­18.7 13.2 1.92
Ages 76+ 7.56­17.0 12.6 1.72
Women (years)
Ages 57­65 7.89­18.3 12.6 1.63
Ages 66­75 4.50­18.4 12.3 1.81
Ages 76+ 6.58­16.4 12.0 1.66
WILLIAMS AND MCDADE
i136
References
Beghe, C., Wilson,A., & Ershler, W. B. (2004). Prevalence and outcomes of
anemia in geriatrics: A systematic review of the literature. American
Journal of Medicine, 116, 3S­10S.
Callan, M. F. C. (2004). The immune response to Epstein-Barr virus. Mi-
crobes and Infection, 6, 937­945.
Cesari, M., Penninx, B. W., Lauretani, F., Russo, C. R., Carter, C.,
Bandinelli, S., Atkinson, H., Onder, G., Pahor, M., & Ferrucci, L.
(2004). Hemoglobin levels and skeletal muscle: Results from the In-
CHIANTI Study. Journal of Gerontology: Biological Sciences, 59A,
249­254.
Ford, E., & Mokdad, A. (2003). Trends in glycosylated hemoglobin con-
centration among United States adults. Diabetes, 52, 219.
Glaser, R., Pearson, G. P., Bonneau, R. H., Esterling, B. A., Atkinson, C.,
& Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1993). Stress and the memory T-cell re-
sponse to the Epstein-Barr virus in healthy medical students. Health
Psychology, 12, 435­442.
Glaser, R., Pearson, G. R., Jones, J. F., Hillhouse, J., Kennedy, S., Mao, H.,
& Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1991). Stress related activation of Epstein-
Barr virus. Brain Behavior and Immunity, 5, 219­232.
Goodnough, L. T., & Nissenson, A. R. (2004). Anemia and its clinical con-
sequences in patients with chronic diseases. American Journal of
Medicine, 116, 1S­2S.
Grant, T., Soriano, Y., Marantz, P. R., Nelson, I., Williams, E., & Ramirez,
D. (2004). Community-based screening for cardiovascular disease
and diabetes using HbA1c. American Journal of Preventive Medi-
cine, 26, 271­275.
Koenigh, W., Sund, M., Frohlich, M., & Fischer, H. G. (1999). C-Reactive
protein, a sensitive marker of inflammation, predicts future risk of
coronary heart disease in initially healthy middle-aged men: Results
from the MONICA (Monitoring Trends and Determinants in Cardio-
vascular Disease)Augsburg Cohort Study, 1984 to 1992. Circulation,
99, 237­242.
Lipschitz, D. (2003). Medical and functional consequences of anemia in
the elderly. Journal of Geriatrics Society, 51, S10­S13.
McDade, T. W., Burhop, J., & Dohnal, J. (2004). High sensitivity enzyme
immunoassay for C-reactive protein from dried blood spots. Clinical
Chemistry, 50, 652­654.
McDade, T. W., Stallings, J. F., & Worthman, C. (2000). Culture change
and stress in Western Samoan youth: Methodological issues in the
cross-cultural study of stress and immune function. American Jour-
nal of Human Biology, 12, 792­802.
McDade, T. W., Williams, S., & Snodgrass, J. J. (2007). What a drop can do:
Dried blood spots as a minimally invasive method for integrating bio-
markers into population-based research. Demography, 44, 785­803.
O'Broin, S., & Gunter, E. (1999). Screening of folate status with use of
dried blood spots on filter paper. American Journal of Clinical Nutri-
tion, 70, 359­367.
Pai, J. K., Pischon, T., Ma, J., & Manson, J. E. (2004). Inflammatory mark-
ers and the risk of coronary heart disease in men and women. New
England Journal of Medicine, 351, 2599­2610.
Pearson, T. A., Mensah, G. A., Alexander, R., Anderson, J. L., Cannon, R.
O., Criqui, M., et al. (2003). Markers of inflammation and cardiovas-
cular disease: Application to clinical and public health practice: A
statement for healthcare professionals from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and the American Heart Assocation. Circula-
tion, 107, 499­511.
Penninx, B., Guralnik, J. M., Onder, G. L., Ferucci, L., Wallace, R. B., &
Pahor, M. (2003). Anemia and decline in physical performance
among older persons. American Journal of Medicine, 115, 104­110.
Ridker, P. M. (2003). High-sensitivity C-reactive protein and cardiovascular
risk: Rationale for screening and primary prevention. American Jour-
nal of Cardiology, 92, 17K­22K.
Ridker, P. M., Cushman, M., Stampfer, J. J., Tracy, R. P., & Hennekens,
C. H. (1997). Inflammation, aspirin, and the risk of cardiovascular
disease in apparently healthy men. New England Journal of Medi-
cine, 336, 973­979.
Ridker, P. M., Rifai, N., Rose, L., Buring, J. E., & Cook, N. R. (2002).
Comparison of C-reactive protein and low-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol levels in the prediction of first cardiovascular events. New
England Journal of Medicine, 347, 1557­1565.
Shirtcliff, E. A., Reavis, R., Overman, W. H., & Granger, D. A. (2001).
Measurement of gonadal hormones in dried blood spots versus se-
rum: Verification of menstrual cycle phase. Hormones and Behavior,
39, 258­266.
Smith, S. C.,Anderson, J. L., Cannon, R. O., Fadl,Y.Y., Koenig, W., Libby,
P., Lipshultz, S.E., Mensah, G.E., Ridker, P.M., & Rosenson, R.
(2004). CDC/AHA workshop on markers of inflammation and car-
diovascular disease: Application to clinical and public health prac-
tice. Circulation, 110, 550e­553e.
Thompson, M. P., & Kurzrock, R. (2004). Epstein-Barr virus and cancer.
Clinical Cancer Research, 10, 803­821.
Yoshinaga, H., & Kosaka, K. (1996). High glycosylated hemoglobin levels
increase the risk of progression to diabetes mellitus in subjects with
glucose intolerance. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 31,
71­79.
Received July 22, 2008
Accepted October 28, 2008
Decision Editor: Robert B. Wallace, MD, MSc
