econstor
Make Your Publications Visible.
A Service of
zbwLeibniz-Informationszentrum
Wirtschaft
Leibniz Information Centre
for Economics
Buch, Claudia M.; Kleinert, Jörn
Working Paper
Who Goes East? The Impact of Enlargement on the
Patterns of German FDI
IAW-Diskussionspapiere, No. 24
Provided in Cooperation with:
Institute for Applied Economic Research (IAW)
Suggested Citation: Buch, Claudia M.; Kleinert, Jörn (2006) : Who Goes East? The Impact
of Enlargement on the Patterns of German FDI, IAW-Diskussionspapiere, No. 24, Institut für
Angewandte Wirtschaftsforschung (IAW), Tübingen
This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/21862
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.
Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.
www.econstor.eu
INSTITUT FÜR
ANGEWANDTE
WIRTSCHAFTSFORSCHUNG
Ob dem Himmelreich 1
72074 Tübingen
T:(0 70 71) 98 96-0
F:(0 70 71) 98 96-99
E-Mail:iaw@iaw.edu
Internet:www.iaw.edu
IAW-Diskussionspapiere
Discussion Paper
24
Who Goes East?
The Impact of Enlargement on
the Patterns of German FDI
Claudia M. Buch
Jörn Kleinert
March 2006
ISSN:1617-5654
IAW-Diskussionspapiere
Das Institut für Angewandte Wirtschaftsforschung (IAW) Tübingen ist ein unabhängiges
außeruniversitäres Forschungsinstitut, das am 17. Juli 1957 auf Initiative von Professor
Dr. Hans Peter gegründet wurde. Es hat die Aufgabe, Forschungsergebnisse aus dem
Gebiet der Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften auf Fragen der Wirtschaft anzuwenden.
Die Tätigkeit des Instituts konzentriert sich auf empirische Wirtschaftsforschung und
Politikberatung.
Dieses IAW-Diskussionspapier können Sie auch von unserer IAW-Homepage
als pdf-Datei herunterladen:
http://www.iaw.edu/Publikationen/IAW-Diskussionspapiere
ISSN 1617-5654
Weitere Publikationen des IAW:
ˇ IAW-News (erscheinen 4x jährlich)
ˇ IAW-Report (erscheinen 2x jährlich)
ˇ IAW-Wohnungsmonitor Baden-Württemberg (erscheint 1x jährlich kostenlos)
ˇ IAW-Forschungsberichte
Möchten Sie regelmäßig eine unserer Publikationen erhalten, dann wenden Sie sich
bitte an uns:
IAW Tübingen, Ob dem Himmelreich 1, 72074 Tübingen,
Telefon 07071 / 98 96-0
Fax 07071 / 98 96-99
E-Mail: iaw@iaw.edu
Aktuelle Informationen finden Sie auch im Internet unter: http://www.iaw.edu
Der Inhalt der Beiträge in den IAW-Diskussionspapieren liegt in alleiniger Verantwortung der
Autorinnen und Autoren und stellt nicht notwendigerweise die Meinung des IAW dar.
Who Goes East?
The Impact of Enlargement
on the Patterns of German FDI1
Claudia M. Buch (University of Tübingen and IAW)
Jörn Kleinert (University of Tübingen)
February 2006
Abstract
Affiliates of German firms in Eastern Europe differ from those in the rest of the world. They
have smaller sales and they employ more labor. Labor productivity is thus lower than in
affiliates of German firms elsewhere. Moreover, multinational activity in Eastern Europe is
mostly unilaterally whereas, for industrialized countries, bilateral FDI linkages dominate. In
this paper, we aim at explaining differences in the activities of German multinational firms in
Eastern and Western Europe. Do German firms engage in different activities in Eastern and
Western Europe, i.e. do the types of affiliates differ? Or do smaller German parent firms
particularly benefit from enlargement, i.e. do characteristics of the parents differ in a
systematic way?
JEL classification: F15, F23, L23
Keywords: Eastern enlargement, foreign direct investment, firm heterogeneity
1 Corresponding author: Claudia M. Buch, University of Tübingen, Department of Economics, Mohlstrasse
36, 72074 Tübingen, Germany, Phone: +49 7071 2972962, e-mail: claudia.buch@uni-tuebingen.de and
Institute for Applied Economic Research (IAW), Tübingen. This paper has been prepared for the
conference ,,Labor and Capital Flows in Europe Following Enlargement" in Warsaw, January 2006. The
paper has partly been written during visits of the authors to the Research Centre of the Deutsche
Bundesbank. The hospitality of the Bundesbank and access to its firm-level database "International Capital
Links" (Midi) are gratefully acknowledged. The project has also benefited from financial support through
the German Science Foundation under the project "Multinational Enterprises: New Theories and Empirical
Evidence from German Firm-Level Data" (BU 1256/6-1). We would like to thank Farid Toubal as well as
participants of the Warsaw-conference for most helpful comments on an earlier draft and Iryna Brammen
for excellent research assistance. All errors are in our own responsibility.
2
1 Motivation
Affiliates of German firms in Eastern Europe differ from those in the rest of the world. They
have smaller sales, and they employ relatively more labor. Table 1 shows that the transition
countries of Central and Eastern Europe accounted for 7% of the foreign direct investment
(FDI) of German firms abroad at the end of 2003. Their share in the numbers of employees
(22.7%) and in the number of affiliates (15.7%) was significantly higher. Average sales per
affiliate are only half of the value observed for developed countries. Labor productivity is thus
lower than in affiliates of German firms elsewhere. Moreover, multinational activity in
Eastern Europe is mostly unilateral whereas, for industrialized countries, bilateral FDI
linkages dominate.
--- Insert Table 1 about here. ---
These new patterns of integration have raised an intense public debate on the costs and
benefits of globalization in Germany ­ just as in many other developed countries. Eastern
enlargement is often viewed as the key trigger of small and mid-sized firms into foreign
markets, thus exposing the German economy and German workers to a new threat of
international competition.
Policy discussions on the role of multinational firms in the new EU member states differ from
those in the West. Although, as in the West, people fear adverse labor market effects of
multinational activity, they do so for different reasons. Multinational enterprises (MNEs) may
feel less committed to preserving employment than domestic firms, hence restructuring firms
and laying off workers more easily. Although the overall employment effects of more MNE
activity are likely to be positive, uncertainty and the need for a flexible adjustment of the
labor market may increase. Also, if large foreign firms enter, this may put increased
competitive pressure on the incumbent domestic firms.
Two key characteristics of multinational firms are thus central to the policy debate. The first
is the size of firms. If small and mid-sized firms start investing abroad, globalization may
affect also those firms of the Western economies that have previously not been able to
relocate production. For the destination countries of FDI, large rather than small entrants may
be a concern as large entrants may increase competitive pressure.
The second characteristic of multinational firms that is important to the policy debate is their
labor intensity. If multinationals that invest in Eastern Europe are relatively labor intensive,
this may have positive effects on the labor markets in the host economies, but these benefits
may come at the expense of employment in the source countries of FDI.
In this paper, we document and explain differences with regard to the size and the labor
intensity of German multinationals in Eastern and Western Europe. We argue that the
observed differences can originate from three distinct sources.
First, foreign affiliates of multinational firms differ across countries because they perform
different functions. If foreign affiliates are set up in order to save production costs in general
and labor costs in particular, they are likely to be more labor intensive than their parents. If,
however, foreign affiliates are set up in order to improve market access, differences in the
labor intensity between the affiliate and the parent are likely to be less pronounced.
3
Second, differences in the size and in the labor intensity of the affiliate might reflect
differences in parent characteristics. Recent models of multinational firm stress the impact of
differences in productivity of the parent for the choice of entry (see, e.g., Helpman et al.
2004). According to these models, firms self-select into different groups of multinational
firms. The most productive firms set up production facilities abroad and sell their products on
the foreign market. The least productive firms stay at home and service only the domestic
market. The size of firms in each group is country-specific. Thus, according to these models,
countries with low entry barriers would host more and on average smaller foreign affiliates.
Third, irrespective of the purpose that a foreign affiliate serves and the productivity of the
parent, differences in the age of affiliates may explain differences in the size of affiliates.
Ceteris paribus, older firms tend to be larger than their younger counterparts. Finding that
smaller affiliates are active in Eastern Europe might thus reflect the fact that multinational
activity in Central and Eastern Europe started only in the 1990s.
An additional reason for differences in affiliate structures could be differences in factor
endowments across countries. Even if affiliates in different countries perform the same
functions, their labor intensities are likely to differ if countries have different factor
endowments. For example, a pure sales outlet in a country with low labor costs is likely to be
more labor intensive than a pure sales outlet in a country with high labor costs. However, we
cannot test this effect of factor endowments because we cannot isolate it from the other
influences mentioned above.
To explore why characteristics of German foreign affiliates in Eastern and Western Europe
differ, we make use of a novel dataset provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank. For a couple of
years now, the Bundesbank has provided external researchers with access to its firm-level
database `International Capital Links', which has detailed information on the foreign affiliates
of German firms abroad (and on affiliates of foreign firms in Germany). The data start in
1989. Until recently, essentially no information on the German parent firms has been
available. For the years 2002-2003, however, selected additional information has been
provided on the German reporting firm. Hence we can use this additional information to
obtain evidence on heterogeneity across parents.
The focus of this paper is on German data for two interrelated reasons. First, Germany is one
of the largest investor in Eastern Europe. Almost one third of all FDI into the region comes
from German firms. The second and third most important investors, the Netherlands and
Austria, follow with shares of only 14 and 9%, respectively. Hence although we focus only on
one source country of FDI, our analysis yet captures a significant share of FDI into Eastern
Europe. Second, in contrast to evidence for other important source countries of FDI into
Eastern Europe, firm-level data are available for German firms. Hence, we can disentangle the
impact of affiliate and of parent characteristics, which would not be feasible using aggregated
data.
This is not the first paper to study the activities of German firms in Eastern Europe. Earlier
work has used mainly aggregated data. (For a survey of the evidence see Toubal (2004).)
More recently, firm-level data have been used as well. First results of Becker et al. (2005) and
Marin (2004) show that jobs in domestic and foreign plants of German firms are substitutes,
but that total job losses through foreign direct investment are quite low. Buch et al. (2005)
provide a detailed analysis of the determinants of German firms' foreign activities, but their
research does not focus on differences between Eastern and Western Europe. They find that,
overall, German FDI is mostly driven by the market access motive.
4
This paper differs from earlier research in two main regards. First, we focus on German FDI
in Eastern Europe using data at different levels of aggregation. As earlier studies on German
FDI, we use sectoral and aggregated data to obtain a broad picture of the determinants of
multinational activity. However, these data do not allow the different determinants of affiliate
characteristics to be disentangled. Hence the second innovation of this paper is that we use
firm-level data to identify the factors that contribute to the systematic differences of German
firms' foreign affiliates.
This paper has five main parts. In the following Part 2, we briefly review the theoretical
literature on multinational firms. We discuss the implications of models that focus on the
different functions that foreign affiliates can serve as well as on the implications of recent
theoretical work emphasizing heterogeneity of parents. In Part 3, we provide a set of
descriptive statistics. These provide an intuition why the patterns of German multinationals in
Eastern Europe differ from those in the rest of the world. In Part 4, we study these patterns in
a regression-based framework, using data aggregated by host country, sector-level data, and
firm-level data. Part 5 concludes. We find that German firms expand into Eastern Europe
both, in order to improve market access and in order to reduce production costs. The
production cost motive is somewhat more important than for FDI activity in Western Europe.
Contrary to expectations, multinational parents that are active in Eastern Europe are larger, on
average, than the typical German multinational. Production in Eastern Europe is also
relatively labor intensive.
2 Motives for Internationalization: Theoretical Background
Exploring the different motives for the internationalization of production has been an
important theme in the literature on multinational firms in recent years. (See for surveys
Markusen (2002) or Barba-Navaretti and Venables (2004)). This research has stressed two
main reasons for setting up affiliates abroad: lowering production costs and lowering costs of
market access. Below, we review the implications of these models. We also sketch
implications of recent theoretical models which put emphasis on differences in parent
characteristics to endogenously derive the decision to invest in a foreign country.
2.1 Production Costs versus Market Access
Evidence provided in Table 1 shows that affiliates of German firms in Eastern Europe differ
from affiliates in other countries along some key dimensions. What is it that can explain these
differences? One possible answer to this question lies in the different purposes that foreign
affiliates can fulfill. In the literature, two main motives for setting up affiliates abroad are
being distinguished.
According to the first motive for internationalization, firms internationalize production and
become multinationals because they aim at reducing production costs. Hence these firms split
up the production process and relocate labor intensive stages of production into countries
richly endowed with labor. They take advantage of existing factor-price differentials between
countries to relocate production across borders. Relocation of production takes place
according to the comparative advantages of countries (Helpman 1984). Multinational firms
that emerge in this framework are vertically integrated as they conduct different activities in
5
different locations. If factor-price considerations are behind the internationalization of
production, we should see
o one-directional FDI flows from capital-, management-, or human capital-rich (developed)
countries to countries richly endowed with labor (developing countries)
o activities of multinational firms that increase in the degree of dissimilarity in factor
endowments between countries, and
o multinational firms which have foreign affiliates specializing in different stages of
production than their domestic headquarters.
A priori, considering the differences in factor endowments between Eastern and Western
Europe, we might expect factor-price considerations to play a more important role for the
expansion of German firms into Eastern compared to Western Europe. However, for countries
richly endowed with labor, there is an additional driving force of internationalization. Before
turning to the empirical evidence, we discuss the second motive for internationalization of
production ­ market access.
According to the second motive for internationalization, multinationals are vehicles to
overcome distance and to facilitate access to foreign markets (see, e.g. Krugman 1983,
Brainard 1993, Markusen and Venables 1998, Markusen 2002). In this framework, firms have
different channels for entering a foreign market. Each of these channels incurs different costs.
A firm has the choice between producing at home and exporting final products to a foreign
market (which involves variable `distance costs') and producing abroad (which involves the
additional fixed costs of setting up a second plant in the host country).
Firms thus face a trade off between producing abroad in order to maximize proximity to the
customer or to concentrate production in order to exploit economies of scale. Multinational
firms in this framework are horizontally integrated as they produce the same product in two
plants. Parents and affiliates perform the same types of activity, and they differ only with
respect to location. Moreover, the headquarter unit produces a so-called headquarter service,
which embodies the specific advantage of the firm. This service can be used in both plants at
the same time in a non-rivalry manner. If the market access motive is behind the
internationalization of production, we should see
o two-directional FDI flows as countries can be the home and the host of multinational
firms at the same time
o that activities of multinational firms increase in the degree of similarity of countries,
and
o multinational firms that conduct the same activities at home and abroad.
Distinguishing between production cost and market access driven FDI is important because
the labor market implications differ. Since FDI driven by the market access motive takes
place on a bilateral basis and since it helps expanding output markets, labor market
implications are positive. Source-country labor market implications of FDI that is driven by
the production cost motive, in contrast, are more likely to be negative. This type of FDI still
6
helps lowering costs and thus improving the overall competitiveness, but employment of low-
skilled workers may fall if labor-intensive stages of production are moved to foreign
countries.
Empirically, multinational activity is of course driven by production cost and by market
access considerations. Hence by simply looking at a particular multinational firm, we cannot
decide which of the two dominates. However, regression-based empirical methods help us to
identify which of the different motives for internationalization is empirically more important.
We will return to this issue in Part 4 below.
2.2 Firm Heterogeneity and the Choice of Entry
Theoretical work invoked so far helps explaining differences in affiliate structures through
differences in the functions that these affiliates perform. The models work with the
assumption that a representative firm exists. This assumption does not, however, square with
the empirical evidence. Generally, the size distribution of firms is approximately log-normal
(Cabral and Mata 2003). For foreign affiliates, the same distribution can be found (Buch et al.
2005). UNCTAD (2001) reports a strong concentration in outward FDI among parent firms.
Even for the United States, which have a relatively diversified structure of foreign direct
investment, the 50 largest parent firms account for more than half of total outward FDI stocks.
Firms are thus heterogeneous, and heterogeneity matters because large and more productive
firms tend to expand internationally. In representative firm models, self-selection of firms into
different groups is not an issue. Yet, self-selection might be the source of the different
characteristics of German multinational firms' affiliates in Eastern and Western European
countries. The heterogeneous firm model of Helpman et al. (2004), which is based on Melitz
(2003), helps getting an intuition whether different characteristics of German firms' foreign
affiliates mirror differences among their parents.
In Helpman et al. (2004), foreign direct investment (FDI) is assumed to be horizontal. The
new feature of Helpman et al. (2004) is that the model assumes heterogeneity among firms
with respect to their productivity. In the initial period, productivity is drawn by each firm
from a common distribution. Depending on their productivity, firms then select themselves
into groups, which differ in their choice of whether and how to supply the foreign market.
Selection into domestic and foreign markets depends on the fixed costs of entering each
market. Producing and selling only domestically involves the lowest fixed costs, exporting
involves fixed costs in an intermediate range, and investing abroad involves the highest fixed
costs. The fixed costs of exporting can be thought of as the costs of setting up distribution
networks. In addition, exporting to foreign countries involves (variable) iceberg transportation
costs. Production abroad saves on these variable distance costs but involves higher fixed costs
in the foreign country.
Country-specific fixed costs, price levels, and market size affect affiliates' characteristics. To
see this, assume two identical foreign countries that differ only in the fixed costs of exporting
and of setting up a new plant. The fixed costs are sufficiently low to allow production of some
firms in both countries. For the most productive firms, it is profitable to produce in both
countries. For less productive firms, it is profitable to produce in the country with lower fixed
costs and to export to the other country. Even less productive firms export to both countries
and still less productive firms export only to the country with the lower fixed costs of
7
exporting. The least productive firms produce only for the home country. Whether firms are
domestic or international, or whether they engage in exports or in FDI, thus depends on their
productivity relative to some critical productivity levels for each activity.
The different productivity levels determine the self-selection of firms into the different
groups. The model also has implications for the patterns of multinational activity across
countries. First, the smallest (least productive) firm that exports to the country with low fixed
costs is smaller (less productive) than the least productive firm that exports to the country
with high fixed costs. Second, more firms are active in the country with low fixed costs.
Third, since the group of firms active in the country with low fixed costs includes smaller
(less productive) firms, the average size (productivity level) is lower in this country. Hence
there is a monotonic correspondence from parent productivity to affiliates' size. More
specifically, lower average productivity translates into lower average size of affiliates in the
country with lower fixed costs.
The model shows that differences in the fixed costs of entry and in the productivity of the
parent can explain differences in affiliate characteristics in Eastern and Western Europe. Since
the opening up of Eastern Europe has lowered fixed costs of entry in these countries, it may
have allowed small and medium-sized German firms to produce internationally. These firms
are, according to this model, the least productive. If smaller firms are active in Eastern
Europe, their affiliates should be smaller too. If size is positively related to capital intensity,
the model could also explain the different characteristics of Eastern and Western European
affiliates without reverting to different functions of foreign affiliates.
3 Descriptive Statistics
Affiliates of German firms in Eastern Europe are smaller on average than their Western
counterparts, and they employ relatively more labor. Are these differences in affiliate
structures due to the different functions that these affiliates perform? Are they due to
differences in parent characteristics? Or are they simply due to the fact that Eastern European
affiliates are younger? In this section, we provide descriptive statistics based on a German
firm-level dataset which provide a first answer to these questions. A detailed description of
the data is given in the appendix.
3.1 Production Costs versus Market Access
To get a first intuition of the relative importance of the market access versus the production
cost motive for internationalization, we look at the patterns of multinational activity across
countries, at the sector patterns of German MNE activity, and at the sector classification of
parents and affiliates.
As regards the patterns of multinational activity across countries, Table 2 shows that FDI into
Eastern Europe is mostly unilateral whereas FDI among the more developed OECD countries
is mostly bilateral. Hence there is relatively little FDI going from the Eastern European
countries into the OECD region.
--- Insert Table 2 about here. ---
8
We next look at the sector composition of German firms' foreign affiliates to analyze whether
affiliates in Eastern and Western Europe carry out different functions. Since factor intensities
differ across sectors, we would expect to find differences in the regional patterns of sectoral
investment if factor endowments matter for the locational choice.
Table 3 shows the sector composition of German parents and their foreign affiliates in Eastern
and Western Europe. The group of Eastern European countries includes the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. The group of
Western European countries, which we use for comparison, includes Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. We focus on
this group of `core' EU countries for two reasons. First, this is a group of countries which has
factor endowments similar to those of Germany. For these countries, we expect a dominance
of the market access motive. Second, the countries in core Europe are in similar geographical
proximity to Germany as the new EU member states. Hence this choice of countries reduces
the potential selection bias which might arise from differences in geographic distance.
--- Insert Table 3 about here. ---
With regard to the sector of the parent, Table 3 reveals relatively small differences in the
broad patterns of activities in Eastern and Western Europe. The manufacturing sector
accounts for about 60-70% of the total activity. Services firms make up an additional 30-40%.
This pattern is relatively similar for FDI stocks, affiliates' sales, and the number of
employees. Using the capital of the affiliates as a measure of the relatively importance of
sectors gives a different picture because of a dominance of financial services firms. These
firms alone account for 42% of the capital of affiliates in Eastern Europe and an even higher
66% in Western Europe. Looking at the data at a more disaggregated level, differences and
similarities between the two regions become apparent. In terms of FDI stocks, the electricity
sector ranks second in both regions, accounting for about 15% of total FDI stocks. However,
the most important sector is transport equipment in the East ­ for which the production cost
motive is likely to be important ­ and financial services in the West ­ for which the market
access motive is likely to be important.
With regard to the sector of the foreign affiliates, differences between the two regions become
even more pronounced. Service sectors are much more important in Western Europe than in
Eastern Europe with about 30% to 50% of the total. This holds regardless of what measure of
activities we use. Again, if we look at FDI or affiliates' capital, the much greater importance
of financial services in Western Europe drives this result. If we look at affiliates' sales, the
wholesale sector, which is much more important in Western Europe, dominates. If we look at
employment, wholesales and business services are more important in Western than in Eastern
Europe. Thus, there are differences in the sector composition of the foreign affiliates,
although not in the sector composition of the German parent firms, which might explain the
differences in Table 1. Finally, holdings are more important to Western than for Eastern
Europe.2
We also compare the sector classification of the German parent firm to the classification of
their foreign affiliates at the firm-level. Table 4 provides a breakdown of the number of
foreign affiliates that German parent firms maintain abroad by the sector of the investing firm
and the foreign affiliate in Eastern Europe. The sector of the foreign affiliate is listed across
the columns, and the sector of the German parent is listed down the rows.
2 Weichenrieder (2005) analyzes the determinants of foreign holding firms established by German parent
firms in detail.
9
--- Insert Table 4 about here. ---
The market access motive rules out foreign affiliates that conduct different activities as their
parent firm. Thus, if the market access motive dominates, we would expect many entries on
the diagonal or in the wholesale sector (sector 18). The production cost motive, in contrast,
allows (although not necessitates) affiliates to be classified in a different sector. Thus, if
affiliates and parent firm are not classified in the same sector, we can reject the market access
motive. The converse is not true, however. If affiliate and parent are classified in the same
sector, we cannot reject the production cost motive, because we know only the sector
classification of firms but we know nothing about the actual activities that firms perform or
the products they produce.
Table 4 shows that foreign affiliates in Eastern Europe are mainly classified in the same sector
as the parent firm. This pattern is particularly pronounced in manufacturing. For service
activities, there is also a close correspondence of the sector of the parent and of the affiliate.
At the same time, there is also a relatively large number of service affiliates which are owned
by manufacturing firms. Although this type of FDI takes place in a different sector, it is likely
to be driven by the market access motive. About two-thirds (66 %) of all affiliates are
classified in the same sector as their parent firm. Parent firms from manufacturing own mostly
affiliates in the same sector (62.8%) or in wholesale (22.7%). Only 9.1% of all affiliates of
manufacturing parent are classified in a different manufacturing sector. By and large, this
confirms evidence for all affiliates of German firms (Buch et al. 2005).
3.2 Firm Heterogeneity and the Choice of Entry
The descriptive statistics presented so far provide preliminary information on the functions
that affiliates might serve in different countries. They were based on the idea that different
motives to enter a foreign country shape the differences between the foreign affiliates of
German multinational firms. Yet, models with heterogeneous firms suggest that the interplay
of firm heterogeneity and country characteristics might also generate the systematic
differences between foreign affiliates in Eastern and Western Europe that we have presented
in Table 1.
Differences in country-specific entry costs, price levels, and in market size yield country-
specific critical productivity levels for the self-selection into the groups of domestic, export,
and FDI firms.. Here, we only have information on FDI firms. To analyze whether firms' self-
selection drives the differences of affiliates characteristics in Eastern and Western Europe, we
thus look at the size distribution of German firms' affiliates in both regions.
--- Insert Figure 1 about here. ---
Figure 1 displays size distribution of all German parents, parents that own affiliates only in
Eastern Europe, and parents that own affiliates only in Western Europe. We look at two
criteria of firm size: sales and employment. These yield different results. While parents with
affiliates in Western Europe are larger if size is measured in terms of parents' sales, parents
with affiliates in Eastern Europe are larger if size is measured in terms of parents'
employment. Applying the reasoning of Helpman et al. (2004), more productive firms are
active in Western Europe ­ because higher productivity translates into higher sales, not higher
employment. However, if employment is the preferable measure of size because, for instance
10
employment is a real measure while sales are a nominal measure, larger and thus more
productive firms are active in Eastern Europe.
Finding different patterns according to different size measures, we cannot explain the
differences across affiliates solely by self-selection of parents into the different groups. Hence
the interplay of parent firm heterogeneity and country-specific fixed costs alone cannot
explain differences of affiliates. Instead, firms that invest in Eastern and Western Europe
differ with regard to their labor productivity. More specifically, the firms that invest in
Eastern Europe have lower labor productivity than those that invest in Western Europe. In the
context of the model by Helpman et al. (2004), this result could be taken as evidence for
lower costs of entry into Eastern European markets. However, firms that invest in Eastern and
Western Europe as well as their affiliates abroad also differ with regard to their capital
intensities. Such differences in technologies are ruled out by this model. Hence differences in
factor intensities suggest that affiliates in Eastern and Western Europe perform different
functions.
In Table 5, we provide tests which show whether the differences in Figure 1 are statistically
significant. It presents Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of equality in size of parent firms than own
affiliates in Eastern Europe and those that own affiliates in Western Europe. The tests confirm
the results of Figure 1. Parents with affiliates in Western Europe are larger if measured in
terms of sales and smaller if measured in terms of employment.
--- Insert Table 5 about here. ---
3.3 Summary of Descriptive Statistics
Overall, we find evidence for the importance of different motives for firms to engage in
Eastern and in Western Europe. First, FDI into Eastern Europe is mostly unilateral. Activities
of German multinational firms in Eastern Europe are much larger than Eastern European
firms' activities in Germany. In contrast, with Western Europe, German multinational firms'
activities are mostly bi-directional (see Table 2 and Buch et al. 2005). Second, the sector
composition of FDI into the two regions differs. The most important difference is the
importance of financial services for the West and transport equipment for the East. Third, the
parent-affiliate structure for German firms shows that many foreign affiliates in Eastern and
Western Europe are active in the same sector as the German parent. While this pattern is
consistent with a proximity-concentration model, stressing the market access motive, it does
not rule out the factor-proportion model, stressing production costs motives for
internationalization. Fourth, firm-level heterogeneity in proximity-concentration models alone
is not sufficient to explain the differences in affiliates' characteristics. In particular, different
measures of size yield different conclusions about average and minimum productivity of
affiliates in both regions. In sum, while there is somewhat greater evidence for the production
cost motive for Eastern Europe, this is not overwhelmingly so.
4 Regression-Based Evidence
The descriptive statistics reported above have given a first impression of the motives of
internationalization of German firms in different regions, but the overall picture has remained
somewhat inconclusive. In this section, we present regression-based evidence that allows
disentangling the different motives in a multivariate framework. We start using aggregated
11
and sector-level data. The empirical analysis is supplemented by firm-level regressions which
allow taking parent characteristics into account.
4.1 Aggregated Data
We rely on an extended gravity equation that has been used frequently in the empirical
literature on the determinants of multinational activity. For our purposes, the key variable is a
similarity index. Our similarity index takes values between 1 and 0, and a higher score implies
that countries are more similar.3 The difference between the GDP per capita of Germany and
the GDP per capita of the host country is used as a proxy for similarity in terms of skills and
human capital. GDP per capita is highly correlated with countries' relative endowments with
capital and, therefore, with the average capital intensity of production in a country. Since
internationalization of activities decreases in the similarity in factor endowments if the
production cost motive dominates, whereas internationalization increases in similarity in
factor endowments if the market access motive dominates, a negative coefficient on this index
is evidence in favor of the production cost motive. A positive coefficient, in contrast, is
evidence in favor of the market access motive. The baseline equation that we estimate is
( ) ( ) ( )
ijt
jt
jt
jt
ijt
Distance
Similarity
GDP
FDI 



 +

+

+
+
= log
log
log
3
2
1
0
where
ijt
FDI is foreign direct investment by sector i in country j in period t, and
ijt
 is an
error term. The dependent variable, GDP and distance are given in logs, and the resulting
coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. A coefficient of, say, 0.6 on one of the logged
explanatory variables (such as GDP) would imply that a 1% increase in this variables would
trigger a 0.6% increase in the dependent variable (such as FDI).
GDP is included to control for the size of countries, and we expect a positive sign. Distance is
included to account for transportation and other distance-related costs, and we expect a
negative sign.
We use four different measures of German firms' foreign activities: the sum of FDI stocks of
all foreign affiliates, the mean of the FDI stock of the foreign affiliates, total affiliate sales,
and the number of foreign affiliates. The distinction between FDI and the sales of foreign
affiliates is important because affiliates sales are a more direct measure of the actual level of
production of foreign affiliates than FDI. Splitting up the aggregated investment volume into
the average foreign investment per affiliate and the number of affiliates that are active abroad
provides information on the extensive and intensive margins of the adjustment to changes in
exogenous variables such as market size or distance costs.
Although we have, in principle, information on the foreign activities of German firms in more
than 200 host countries, we lack reliable time series for quite a few of these countries, mostly
low-income countries. Therefore, the effective sample size is restricted to a little over 100
countries, including a large number of developing countries and emerging markets.
Estimating equation (1) gives the average effect of the exogenous variables on German
outward FDI. We want to compare this effect with the (average) effect for a sample from
Eastern European countries. We therefore additionally include interactions of all explanatory
3 The index is calculated as one minus the ratio of abs (GDP per capita host ­ GDP per capita Germany) to
max (GDP per capita host, GDP per capita Germany) .
12
variables with an Eastern European dummy. This dummy takes the value one if a country is a
CEEC country and zero otherwise.
Table 6 presents the estimates. The gravity variables GDP and distance have the expected
positive and negative signs. Their coefficients have a size comparable to those usually found
in the literature. For distance, the negative effect is driven by the number of affiliates. The
mean volume of FDI, in contrast, increases in distance.
--- Insert Table 6 about here. ---
The most important variable for our analysis is the similarity variable. The positive coefficient
found for the full sample points to a dominance of market access considerations.
Moreover, our results suggest that the determinants of multinational activities do not differ
significantly between Eastern Europe and the rest of the sample. There is only one significant
difference for the Eastern Europe sub-sample: the interaction term effect of the similarity
variable. This interaction term for mean FDI per affiliate is positive and significant,
suggesting that affiliate size if measured in FDI is more strongly affected by similarity in
Eastern Europe than the size of the average foreign affiliate.
4.2 Sector-Level Data
Next, we exploit the sector dimension contained in our dataset. Since sectors differ in their
factor intensities, the motive for internationalization is likely to differ as well. Rather than
aggregating the dependent variable for each country, we now retain the sectoral dimension of
the data. Hence we have a panel which has a sector-country cross-section dimension. Table 7
shows results for each of the NACE sectors separately.
--- Insert Table 7 about here. ---
Country size is positive and significant for all sectors, except mining, wood, electricity and
gas. There is a significantly larger effect of GDP for Eastern European countries in a number
of sectors.
As regards similarity, there is a relatively distinct pattern of positive and significant
coefficients across sectors. This, as has been argued above, would be evidence in favor of the
market access motive for internationalization. Similarity is insignificant for three sectors
(paper products and publishing, coke and petroleum products, non-metallic mineral products),
and we find a significantly negative effect only for the production of transport equipment. As
shown in Table 3, this is one of the sectors which have a significantly higher share in
activities in Eastern Europe compared to Western Europe. As regards similarity, we find
mostly insignificant differences of Eastern European coefficients. Thus, German firms on
average do not pursue different internationalization strategies in the two regions. If the
similarity coefficient for Eastern Europe differs significantly, it has the "wrong" positive sign.
The market access motive would be even more important to Eastern Europe. In only two
sectors, we find a significantly negative interaction term between similarity and our Eastern
Europe dummy. These are the sectors wood products and furniture. This would be evidence in
favor of the hypothesis that the production costs motive dominates for investment by these
sectors in Eastern Europe.
13
Like the regressions using aggregated data, sector data reject significant differences of
German multinational firms in Eastern Europe from their overall internationalization
behavior. The market access motive dominates in almost all sectors, and it sometimes does so
even more in Eastern Europe. This is in line with most of the evidence derived from analysis
using aggregated data (Carr et al. 2001). According to the analyses using aggregated and
sector data, different motives of internationalization are not the main reason for the
differences in affiliate characteristics.
4.3 Firm-Level Evidence
So far, we have looked at differences in factor endowments across countries to discriminate
between the two motives for going abroad. GDP per capita is, as was argued above, a proxy
for the factor endowments of countries. Yet, there is a one-to-one correspondence of firm
characteristics and factor endowments only if firms are symmetric. With heterogeneity and
self-selection, the regression results using aggregated and sectoral data reported above thus
provide only one part of the story. We therefore continue our analysis at the firm-level.
We set up probit and tobit models to analyze firm-level determinants of firms that are active
in Eastern Europe and of those that are active in Western Europe. The unit of analysis is the
affiliate-parent pair. The dependent variable is set to one for each affiliate located in one of
the eight countries in Eastern and Western Europe, respectively, and to zero otherwise.
Overall, our sample comprises 12,129 pairs of German parents and their foreign affiliates.
Data are for the year 2003 because information on the parents is contained in our dataset only
since 2002. The number of observations used is the same in all regressions but the number of
ones differs between the regressions analyzing Western and those analyzing Eastern European
affiliates. Our dataset contains information on 1,378 affiliates of German firms in Eastern
Europe and on 3,845 affiliates in Western Europe.4 Thus, about 43% of all affiliates of
German firms worldwide in our sample are located in one of the 16 countries in the two
regions we analyze. The tobit model is set up in a similar way. Instead of a one for an affiliate
located in Eastern (or Western) Europe, we use its size in terms of FDI as the dependent
variable.
--- Insert Table 8 about here. ---
We explain the decision to invest in Eastern or Western Europe by several firm-level
variables, a border dummy, and a set of dummies controlling for sector-specific fixed effects.
We include three firm-specific variables. The age of the affiliate is included to account for the
fact that younger firms are usually smaller in size. The size of the parent firm is included as a
proxy for the productivity of the parent. The capital intensity of the parent and of the affiliate
are included to check whether more labor-intensive parents are more likely to invest in
Eastern Europe, which would be an indication that the production cost motive is important.
We expect the size of the parent firm to influence the location decision. Smaller firms are
more likely to engage in countries close to their home country if country-specific fixed costs
to depend on distance. Thus, we expect a negative sign for both groups. As an additional
proxy for size, we use the number of affiliates worldwide of a given parent.
Moreover, political discussions in Germany stress the low barriers of entry in Eastern Europe
which allow small and medium-sized firms to relocate their production to these countries. If
this hypothesis was true, we would expect to find that being small increases the probability of
investing in Eastern Europe.
4 Note that these numbers are not comparable to those in Table 1 because we consider only a subgroup of
eight countries in each region.
14
However, our results provide evidence against this hypothesis. If anything, we find that the
size of the parent has a positive impact on the probability of investing in Eastern Europe. The
coefficient on size is negative, in contrast, for the Western European countries. Results from
the tobit model support this finding. Hence our findings suggest that parent characteristics
matter in the sense that larger parents tend to set up affiliates in Eastern Europe. This is in line
with our descriptive statistics in Figure 1.
Next, we are interested in whether capital-labor-ratios are important. If the production cost
FDI motive dominates, we would expect firms which produce labor-intensive to be more
prone to invest in Eastern Europe, where labor is more abundant and less expensive than in
Germany or in Western Europe. In the Western European countries, in contrast, we would not
expect firms to look for comparatively cheap labor. In these countries, the market access
motive should rather dominate. Hence the capital-labor ratio of the parent firm should be
negative in our Eastern Europe regression and insignificant for Western Europe. Although we
find the negative sign in the Eastern Europe probit regression, the capital-labor ratio of the
parent is not significant at the conventional levels of significance. Surprisingly, it is negative
and significant for the Western European regression. One reason could be that the size of the
parent and the capital-labor ratio are positively correlated.
The capital-labor ratio of the affiliate has a negative sign for the Eastern European sample and
a positive sign for the Western European sample. This is consistent with the expectation that
affiliates in Eastern Europe are relatively more labor intensive. Note that our empirical
approach does not allow discriminating whether this is due to the different functions that they
perform or due to differences in factor endowments of countries.
Table 9 looks uses the capital intensity of the affiliate as the dependent variable. We present
four different specifications, using different measures for the size of the parent. Also, we
include dummy variable for three regions, the previously used Central European countries,
core Europe, as well as a second group of reform states, including Belarus, Bulgaria,
Romania, Russia, and Ukraine. Results show a clear and positive link between the size of the
parent and the capital intensity of the affiliate. We obtain the expected negative signs for the
two groups of Central and Eastern European countries (where affiliates are more labor
intensive) as well as a positive sign for core Europe (where affiliates are less labor intensive).
Also, more capital intensive parents tend to have more capital intensive affiliates.
--- Insert Table 9 about here. ---
Returning to Table 8, we expect the age of an affiliate to affect its size. It is a long-established
fact that older firms are larger (Evans 1987, Cabral and Mata 2003). Yet, we might have
difficulties to find this relationship in our data for two reasons. First, we do not know the
exact age of each affiliate since we can trace individual affiliates only since 1996. Hence we
cannot distinguish affiliates that were established already before 1996 from those that were
established in 1996. Second, in Eastern Europe, the nature of the privatization process might
distort the typical relationship between age and size. In many Eastern European countries,
large-scale privatization has gained steam only in the second half of the 1990s. This holds
particularly for public utilities and the banking sectors, i.e. for sectors in which German firms
are quite active (Table 3). This can explain why we find a negative correlation between size
and age in the tobit regressions for the Eastern European sample (see Table 8). For the
Western European sample, in contrast, we find the expected positive correlation.
15
Finally, we include a border dummy variable at the level of the German state, which is set at
one if a German state and a foreign country share a border and to zero otherwise. The border
dummy drops out of the East European probit specification because of colinearity. The border
dummy perfectly predicts investment behavior for some East German states. To share a
border increases the probability to invest in the neighboring country and the size of the
establishment.
5 Summary and Conclusions
The size and the labor intensity of foreign affiliates in Eastern Europe are focal points of
discussions on the risks and benefits of foreign direct investment. In the West, people fear
adverse labor market consequences of an increasing amount of FDI into labor intensive
foreign affiliates. These consequences might be particularly adverse if not only large firms
relocate production but if also small and mid-sized firms start investing abroad. In the East,
entry of foreign firms raises fears of greater labor market instability and greater competition
for the incumbent firms.
In this paper, we have started from the observation that characteristics of foreign affiliates of
German firms in Eastern and Western Europe indeed differ. On average, affiliates in Eastern
Europe are smaller and employ more labor. Interpreting these differences and drawing
conclusions with regard to potential labor market impacts, however, requires disentangling
three different reasons for differences in affiliate structures.
First, affiliates in Eastern Europe might be more labor intensive than their Western
counterparts because German firms fragment their production process and locate labor-
intensive stages in the relatively low-wage Eastern European countries. We find that, for some
manufacturing sectors, the production cost motive for internationalization is indeed important.
Overall, however, regressions using aggregated data show that a large part of German FDI
into Eastern Europe is driven by the market access motive.
Second, differences in parent characteristics have an impact on differences in the structure of
foreign affiliates. Contrary to expectations voiced in the public debate, we find the size of the
parent to have a positive impact on the probability of investing in Eastern Europe. Size has a
negative impact on the probability of investing in core Europe, in contrast. This contradicts
the common perception that Eastern enlargement has been a key trigger of small and mid-
sized firms into foreign markets. It is rather the larger parents that are active in Eastern
Europe.
Third, differences in factor intensities of the parent affect the probability of investing abroad.
Yet, more labor intensive parents as compared to the average German multinational tend to be
active in Eastern and Western Europe. This is in line with the public policy debate regarding
activity in the East ­ but the finding regarding firms active in Western Europe is probably
surprising.
Fourth, we find that the age of the affiliate has a significant impact on its size. Older affiliates
in Eastern Europe tend to be smaller while older affiliates in Western Europe tend to be larger
than their younger counterparts. While the correlation between age and size in Western
Europe meets expectations, the negative correlation in Eastern Europe is likely to be
16
influenced by the nature of the transformation process. The start of large-scale privatization in
the mid-1990s may particularly affect our results.
Overall, the aim of our paper has been to provide a detailed account of the patterns of
specialization and investment in Eastern Europe, using firm-level data from Germany as an
important source country of FDI. In future work, it would be interesting to cross-check these
results with comparable datasets from other countries. Our data have also not allowed
studying the self-selection of firms into export versus FDI firms. Having firm-level
information on FDI and exports would be highly desirable to test implications of recent
theoretical models more directly.
17
6 References
Barba-Navaretti, G.B., and A.J. Venables (2004). Multinational Firms in the World Economy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Becker, S.O., K. Ekholm, R. Jäckle, M-A. Mündler (2005). Location Choice and Employment
Decisions: A Comparison of German and Swedish Multinationals. Kiel Working Paper
1243.
Brainard, S.L. (1993). A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations and Trade with a
Trade-off between Proximity and Concentration. National Bureau of Economic Research
NBER Working Paper 4269. Cambridge MA.
Buch, C.M., J. Kleinert and F. Toubal (2006). Where Enterprises Lead, People Follow? Links
Between Migration and German FDI. European Economic Review (forthcoming)
Buch, C.M., J. Kleinert, A. Lipponer, and F. Toubal (2005). Foreign Direct Investment ­
Firm-Level Evidence. Economic Policy (20): 53­110.
Carr, D., J. Markusen, and K. Maskus (2001). Estimating the Knowledge Capital Model of the
Multinational Enterprise. American Economic Review 91 (3): 693­708.
Cabral, L. and J. Mata (2003). On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
Theory. American Economic Review 93(4): 1075­1090.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2003). Kapitalverflechtung mit dem Ausland, Statistische
Sonderveröffentlichung 10, Frankfurt a.M.: Deutsche Bundesbank.
Evans, D. (1987). Test of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth. Journal of Political Economy
95(4): 657­674.
Fidrmuc, J. (2001). Intraindustry Trade Between the EU and the CEECs: The Evidence of the
First Decade of Transition. Focus on Transition 1: 65­78.
Helpman, E. (1984). A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
Corporations, Journal of Political Economy 92 (3): 451­471.
Helpman, E., M.J. Melitz and S.R. Yeaple (2004). Export versus FDI. American Economic
Review 94 (1): 300­316.
Krugman, P.R. (1983). The New Theories of International Trade and the Multinational
Enterprise, in D. Audretsch and C. Kindleberger (eds.). The Multinational Corporation in
the 1980s, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lipponer, A. (2002a). A ,,new" microdata base for German FDI, in H. Herrmann and R.
Lipsey (eds), Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial
Countries. Berlin: Springer.
Lipponer, A. (2002b). Mikrodatenbank Direktinvestitionsbestände: Handbuch, Deutsche
Bundesbank, mimeo.
Marin, D. (2004). A Nation of Poets and Thinkers - Less So with Eastern Enlargement?
Austria and Germany. Discussion Papers in Economics 329, University of Munich,
Department of Economics
Markusen, J. and A. Venables (1998). Multinational Firms and the New Trade Theory,
Journal of International Economics 46 (2): 183­203.
Markusen, J.R. (2002). Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
18
Melitz, M (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity. Econometrica 71 (6): 1695­1725.
Toubal, F. (2004). The Spatial and Sectoral Distribution of Multinational Activity in Eastern
Europe. University of Kiel. Ph.D. Thesis.
UNCTAD (2001). World Investment Report 2001: Promoting Linkages. New York and
Geneva: UNCTAD.
Weichenrieder, A. (2005). What Determines the Use of Holding Companies and Ownership
Chains? Mimeo. University of Frankfurt.
19
7 Data Appendix
The Deutsche Bundesbank has been carrying out annual full sample surveys on direct
investment stocks pursuant to the Foreign Trade and Payments Regulation (Außenwirtschafts-
verordnung) since 1976. The data base used in this paper was compiled solely for academic
research purposes, and it goes back to 1989. (For details see Lipponer 2002a, 2002b, or
Deutsche Bundesbank 2003.) Time series for individual enterprises, however, are available
only from 1996 to 2003. For semi-aggregated data (by country or sector), data are available
for the years 1989­2003.
The data base contains mainly those data from the foreign affiliates' balance sheets that are
needed to calculate direct investment stocks. The data contain only limited information about
the reporting firm, i.e. about the German headquarters (or, in the case of FDI in Germany,
about the foreign parent). Essentially, with regard to the German investor, information is
restricted to the sector in which the firm is active. Similar sectoral information is available for
the foreign affiliate. Since the year 2000, the data also contain information about the reporting
firm such as its turnover, assets, or employment.
In the period October 1993 through February 2002, German enterprises had to report their
international capital links if the balance sheet total of the foreign affiliates exceeded  5
million (for minority participation rights subject to reporting requirements). In the case of
majority participation rights as well as branches and permanent establishments, foreign
affiliates reported whether their balance sheet total was more than  500,000. Indirect
participating interests had to be reported if a "dependent" foreign affiliate had a holding of
10% or more in another enterprise. Since March 2002, a uniform reporting threshold of 3
million euro has been in place.
Table 1: Regional Breakdown of Activities of German MNEs, 2003
CEECs = Central and Eastern European Countries (Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Ukraine)
FDI
stocks
Affiliate sales Employees Number of
affiliates
FDI Affiliate sales Employees Number of
affiliates
( mn) ( bn) (1,000) (total) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Total 665,839 1,352.9 4,498 22,551 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Developed Countries 574,110 1,081.8 2,753 16,189 86.2 80.0 61.2 71.8
European Union 300,961 571.6 1,619 10,167 45.2 42.2 36.0 45.1
United States 224,037 356.0 766 3,396 33.6 26.3 17.0 15.1
Other 49,113 154.3 368 2,625 7.4 11.4 8.2 11.6
Transition Countries 46,474 139.9 1,021 3,533 7.0 10.3 22.7 15.7
CEECs 34,866 98.8 722 2,583 5.2 7.3 16.1 11.5
China 7,278 24.4 160 566 1.1 1.8 3.5 2.5
Other 4,330 16.7 139 384 0.7 1.2 3.1 1.7
Developing countries 45,255 131.2 724 2,830 6.8 9.7 16.1 12.5
Latin America 20,382 47.3 288 1,051 3.1 3.5 6.4 4.7
Asia 20,551 68.2 331 1,395 3.1 5.0 7.4 6.2
Other 4,322 15.8 105 384 0.6 1.2 2.3 1.7
Source: Authors' calculations based on the database MIDI (International Capital Links) provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank.
21
Table 2: OECD Countries as Sources and Destinations of FDI
CEECs includes the Czech Republic, Poland, and the Slovak Republic; Core EU includes Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom; Other Europe
includes Finland, Greece, Portugal, Sweden, and Switzerland, Oother OECD includes Australia, Canada, Japan and Korea.
Total source = 100% Total destination = 100%
Destination
Source CEECs Core EU Other
Europe
USA Other
OECD
World CEECs Core EU Other
Europe
USA Other
OECD
World
Australia n.a. 25.74 -0.02 53.65 7.78 1.65 n.a. 1.53 -0.01 5.09 1.85 2.03
Austria 15.95 36.84 6.74 8.02 2.02 0.70 9.41 0.56 0.64 0.20 0.12 0.52
Canada 0.20 17.37 1.34 48.83 2.86 4.23 0.12 2.43 1.17 10.90 1.60 4.77
Czech Republic 35.20 13.48 2.50 1.95 0.21 0.29 0.62 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.02
Denmark 1.96 25.01 11.59 17.09 5.43 0.55 2.98 0.99 2.85 1.08 0.85 1.35
Finland 0.75 37.65 30.01 15.07 1.81 0.40 0.93 1.21 6.00 0.77 0.23 1.10
France 1.00 30.74 5.11 25.16 9.44 3.39 10.27 8.19 8.48 10.71 10.04 9.10
Germany 2.81 36.23 5.61 27.69 3.91 7.39 31.38 10.50 10.12 12.82 4.53 9.90
Greece n.a. 20.98 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.14 n.a. 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.12
Italy 1.21 39.31 8.04 11.23 1.93 1.72 5.17 4.36 5.56 1.99 0.86 3.79
Japan n.a. 17.71 0.92 50.59 7.36 1.89 n.a. 3.04 0.99 13.86 5.04 5.86
Korea 1.76 7.74 0.26 28.20 4.84 0.44 1.08 0.12 0.03 0.72 0.31 0.54
Netherlands 1.97 29.86 6.71 25.89 3.50 9.84 14.10 5.53 7.74 7.66 2.59 6.33
Poland 3.20 25.97 6.20 9.37 -0.05 0.52 0.08 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.02
Portugal n.a. 8.56 0.18 2.63 0.30 0.31 0.49 0.09 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.37
Slovak Republic 51.43 21.13 1.39 0.00 0.17 0.07 0.44 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Sweden n.a. 43.90 10.60 18.79 1.76 1.86 n.a. 3.33 5.00 2.28 0.53 2.59
Switzerland 1.06 34.33 2.06 23.10 3.80 2.78 5.74 4.81 1.80 5.18 2.13 4.79
United Kingdom 0.24 43.06 4.79 30.00 4.23 10.56 5.04 23.93 16.57 26.63 9.39 18.97
United States n.a. 36.16 6.54 0.00 18.05 21.37 12.15 29.32 33.03 0.00 58.43 27.68
n.a. = not available
Source: OECD Foreign Direct Investment Statistics (2003).
22
Table 3: Sectoral Breakdown of Activities of German MNEs in Eastern and Western Europe, 2002
Eastern Europe Western Europe
Sector classified with respect to German
parent
Sector classified with respect to foreign
affiliate
Sector classified with respect to German
parent
Sector classified with respect to foreign
affiliate
FDI
stocks
Affiliate
sales
Affiliate
employment
Affiliate
capital
FDI
stocks
Affiliate
sales
Affiliate
employment
Affiliate
capital
FDI
stocks
Affiliate
sales
Affiliate
employment
Affiliate
capital
FDI stocks Affiliate
sales
Affiliate
employment
Affiliate
capital
( mn,%) ( bn,%) (1000,%) ( bn,%)
(
mn,%)
( bn,%) (1000,%) (bn,%)
(
mn,%)
( bn, %) (1000,%) (bn,%) ( mn,%) ( bn,%) (1000, %) (bn,%)
Eastern Europe
Total 33,519.8 96.4 657.7 139.5 33,519.8 96.4 657.7 139.5 331,078 458.4 1,234.8 2,756.1 331,078 458.4 1,234.8 2,756.1
Manufacturing 70.6 67.8 64.9 38.4 66.7 62 66.8 34.9 59.3 62.3 57.6 23.2 19.2 35.2 44.8 6.4
Food products 3.9 5.9 3.7 2.3 3.7 4.6 4.1 2.1 2.8 3.3 2.4 1.1 1.3 1.5 2.1 ...
Textiles 1.2 1.3 2.9 ... ... ... 3.0 ... ... 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Paper & publishing 1.4 1.4 1.9 ... 1.3 1.2 1.8 ... 3.4 1.4 1.8 1.3 ... ... 1.1 ...
Chemicals 3.4 3.2 2.6 1.5 3.3 2.3 2.1 1.3 14.3 10.9 8.9 5.2 6.9 8.7 7.1 2.0
Rubber & plastics 3.1 3.0 3.4 1.4 2.7 2.7 3.4 1.6 1.1 2.0 2.9 ... ... 1.4 2.3 ...
Non-metallic
minerals 5.9 3.0 3.9 2.9 6.0 3.0 4.0 2.7 2.7 1.4 2.4 ... ... 1.2 2.2 ...
Basic metals 3.1 2.3 3.9 1.4 2.9 1.9 4.0 1.2 1.9 4.0 6.5 ... ... 2.5 4.5 ...
Machinery 4.3 3.5 4.1 1.9 2.9 2.4 3.8 1.1 3.1 5.9 8.0 1.1 1.4 3.5 6.4 ...
Electrical & optical
equipment 7.4 7.0 11.4 4.6 5.8 6.2 12.5 2.7 5.2 7.1 10.8 2.4 2.8 4.5 7.0 ...
Transport equipment 20.0 22.6 15.4 9.2 21.1 21.6 16.1 8.3 8.2 19.7 9.3 4.8 1.7 5.9 8.2 ...
Electricity 15.4 11.9 7.4 10.6 14.3 11.8 7.3 11.2 15.2 4.1 1.7 4.7 2.0 3.8 1.8 1.2
Construction ... 1.3 1.8 ... ... 1.2 1.6 ... ... ... 1.1 ... ... ... 1.0 ...
Services 28.3 31.6 34.6 61.4 31.0 37.7 32.6 61.3 40.3 37.2 42.0 76.6 43.7 64.2 54.2 79.6
Wholesale 7.6 18.6 15.1 6.3 10.3 24.8 14.7 6.6 6.7 18.5 15.6 2.7 10.5 44.7 26.8 3.9
Transport &
communication 7.4 5.6 7.5 8.5 7.6 6.0 8.0 9.2 5.6 8.2 11.3 5.6 1.3 8.6 11.0 1.4
Financial services 8.3 3.8 6.8 42.0 7.4 2.8 5.8 38.8 23.5 6.4 8.5 66.4 26.8 6.2 6.0 72.3
Business services 3.9 2.8 3.4 3.9 5.3 3.6 2.1 6.1 4.0 3.2 4.8 1.7 4.7 3.9 8.8 1.9
Holdings n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 1.9 ... ... 3.6 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 36.9 ... ... 13.9
Shares below 1% of the total are not disclosed because of confidentiality reasons.
Source: Authors' calculations based on the database MIDI (International Capital Links) provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Table 4: Number of Foreign Affiliates in Eastern Europe by the Sector of the Parent Firm and Sector of the Affiliate, 2003
d = undisclosed for confidentiality reasons, Sectoral classification: 1 = agriculture, hunting, fishing and forestry, 2 = mining and quarrying, 3 = manufacture of food products,
beverages and tobacco, 4 = manufacture of textiles, textile products, leather and leather products, 5 = manufacture of wood and wood products, 6 = manufacture of pulp, paper,
paper products, publishing and printing, 7 = manufacture of coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel, 8 = manufacture of chemicals, chemical products, and man-made
fibres, 9 = manufacture of rubber and plastic products, 10 = manufacture of non-metallic mineral products, 11 = manufacture of basic metals and fabricated metal products, 12 =
manufacture of machinery and equipment n,e,c,, 13 = manufacture of electrical and optical equipment, 14 = manufacture of transport equipment, 15 = manufacture of furniture
and manufacturing n.e.c., 16 = electricity, gas and water supply, 17 = construction, 18 = wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles and personal and
household goods, 19 = hotels and restaurants, 20 = transport, storage, and communication, 21 = financial intermediation, 22 = real estate, renting and business activities,
consulting, 23 = education, waste management, research and development, public administration and defence and compulsory social security, 24 = holdings.
Source: Authors' calculations based on the database MIDI (International Capital Links) provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Sector foreign affiliate
Sector
parent 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1 5 3 d
2 14 d 4 d d 3
3 d 92 29 3
4 35 d d d 13 d
5 8 d d 3 5
6 42 8 6 3
7 7
8 d 53 3 d d 60 d d d d
9 d 61 d d 5 15 d
10 8 d 102 d 3 d 4
11 d 4 d 102 5 d 3 36 5
12 d d 11 3 9 66 d 4 59 3
13 d 3 4 110 10 44 7 5 d
14 d 7 107 d 18 6 4 8 d d
15 d 27 d
16 d 84 d d 3 13
17 d d d 3 27 5 4
18 d 12 5 5 d d 3 6 12 3 18 4 6 d d 219 d d 37 4
19 d
20 d d 66 d 3 8
21 d d d 125 52 d
22 d 5 d d 8 6 8 d d d d 24 d d 7 215 7
23 5 3 5 d d 4 d 4 5 4 d 3 d 9 d 17 21 4
24
Table 5: Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test of Equality: Size of Parent Firms Owning Affiliates in Eastern versus in Western Europe
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test) determines whether two datasets differ significantly. The KS-test has the advantage of making no assumption about the distribution of
data. The null hypothesis is equality of both distributions. In the first line results are presented of a one-sided test that evaluates whether parents that own affiliates only in Eastern
Europe are smaller than parent that own affiliates only in Western European. The maximal difference in the cumulative distributions is positive, thus the null of equality is not
rejected against the alternative hypothesis that parents owning affiliates in Eastern Europe are smaller with respect to employment. Rejected at the one percent level of
significance is equality of both distributions against the alternative that parents with affiliates only in Western Europe are smaller with respect to employment. This result is given
in line two. Taken together we can reject equality of both distributions at the one percent level of significance.
Smaller group Difference p-value
Size criteria Log employment
Parents with affiliates only in Eastern Europe 0.0011 0.999
Parents with affiliates only in Western Europe ­ 0.3184*** 0.000
Combined K-S 0.3184*** 0.000
Size criteria Log sales
Parents with affiliates only in Eastern Europe 0.111*** 0.000
Parents with affiliates only in Western Europe 0.000 1.000
Combined K-S 0.111*** 0.000
25
Table 6: Regression Results Aggregated Data
The baseline regression that we estimate is: log(Yit
)=0
+ 1
Xit
+ 2
Xi
+ t + it
, where Yit
is the activity German multinationals in country i at time t, Xit
are the time-varying
explanatory variables for country i (GDP, similarity index, etc.), Xi
are the time invariant explanatory variables for country i (distance), t is the time fixed effect, and it
is the
error term. Results reported in this Table have been obtained using the cross-sectional time-series linear model using feasible generalized least squares (XTGLS) in Stata. This
command allows estimation in the presence of AR(1) autocorrelation within panels and cross-sectional correlation and/or heteroscedasticity across panels. Dependent variables
(with the exception of the sales-ratio), GDP, and distance are in logs. Sales are total sales of German firms' foreign affiliates, including intra-firm sales. Data are aggregated over
all affiliates of German firms in a particular host country. Number of affiliates is the total number of affiliates in a given host country. Data for 1995­2001; a full set of time
dummies is included in all regressions (not reported). Absolute values of the z-statistic are given in parentheses: *, ** and *** indicates significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.
Volume of FDI Mean FDI Sales of foreign affiliates Number of affiliates
Log GDP 0.66*** 0.23*** 0.62*** 0.47***
[16.77] [9.95] [19.41] [21.68]
Similarity 3.03*** 0.67*** 3.48*** 2.36***
[11.16] [4.24] [16.16] [15.50]
Log distance ­0.17** 0.09** ­0,07 ­0.18***
[2.42] [2.15] [1.22] [4.28]
Log GDP * Eastern Europe ­0,12 ­0,13 0,06 0,15
[0.42] [0.82] [0.23] [0.81]
Similarity * Eastern Europe ­1,52 3.84* ­0,04 ­3,69
[0.53] [1.93] [0.01] [1.22]
Log distance * Eastern Europe 0,57 0,4 ­0,11 ­0,35
[0.55] [0.70] [0.12] [0.54]
Constant ­3.64*** 1.89*** ­9.56*** ­6.75***
[3.33] [2.94] [11.07] [11.66]
Observations 1138 1138 1159 1181
Number of key 107 107 107 108
26
Table 7: Regression Results Sectoral Data
Results reported in this Table have been obtained using an feasible generalized least squares estimator which accounts for the presence of AR(1) autocorrelation within and cross-
sectional correlation and/or heteroscedasticity across panels. The dependent variable (sales of foreign affiliates), GDP, and distance are given in logs. Data have been aggregated
at a sectoral level, i.e. the data set contains one entry per sector and host country per year. We use data for the years 1990­2001. Sectors are defined following NACE. All
regressions include a full set of time dummies. Robust t-values in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Agriculture Mining Food Textiles Wood Paper & printing Petroleum Chemicals Plastics
Non-metallic
minerals
Log GDP 0.14* ­0.01 0.43*** 0.37*** 0.07 0.87*** 1.03*** 0.80*** 0.86*** 0.66***
[1.84] [0.11] [10.10] [8.42] [0.63] [13.15] [13.00] [21.65] [14.89] [14.18]
Similarity 3.90*** 4.14*** 0.64** 1.29*** 4.50*** 0.00 0.1 1.93*** 0.78*** ­0.11
[8.10] [7.21] [2.23] [4.27] [4.74] [0.00] [0.22] [7.46] [2.58] [0.36]
Log distance 0.87*** 0.1 ­0.83*** 0.09 0.72*** ­0.38*** ­0.21* 0.1 ­0.61*** ­0.86***
[4.38] [0.80] [10.73] [1.29] [3.04] [4.27] [1.75] [1.44] [7.08] [11.62]
Log GDP * Eastern Europe ­1.2 0.76*** 0.22* 0.1 0.1 0.21 0.31 0.2 0.70*** 0.55***
[1.64] [3.98] [1.85] [0.31] [0.40] [0.62] [0.57] [1.51] [5.04] [3.24]
Similarity * Eastern Europe 52.25* ­0.18 3.21** ­4.68 ­14.19*** ­0.37 ­11.72 0.82 ­0.94 4.51***
[1.82] [0.04] [1.99] [0.96] [4.48] [0.04] [1.41] [0.35] [0.20] [2.62]
Log distance * Eastern Europe 3.6 ­2.59*** ­0.77* ­0.16 0.27 ­0.73 ­0.73 ­0.56 ­2.54*** ­2.03***
[1.59] [3.32] [1.79] [0.13] [0.31] [0.55] [0.35] [1.06] [5.78] [3.59]
Constant ­3.37* 7.09*** 4.50*** ­1.36 ­1.89 ­11.06*** ­14.82*** ­10.86*** ­9.17*** ­1.25
[1.70] [4.05] [4.84] [1.27] [0.76] [6.19] [7.63] [11.57] [5.91] [0.95]
Observations 304 408 493 617 292 396 363 809 463 422
Number of groups 42 56 56 66 38 48 47 81 53 54
Metals Machinery
Electrical
machinery
Transport
equipment
Other manu-
facturing Construction Wholesale
Transport &
communication
Financial
services
Business
services
Log GDP 0.70*** 0.84*** 0.74*** 1.15*** 0.29*** 0.33*** 0.75*** 0.48*** 0.64*** 0.78***
[12.32] [17.12] [15.15] [13.16] [4.36] [5.55] [20.99] [10.54] [12.01] [18.61]
Similarity 1.13*** 1.66*** 2.03*** ­0.94** 1.47*** 3.11*** 3.20*** 2.08*** 3.88*** 2.57***
[3.64] [5.43] [6.66] [2.55] [4.19] [9.18] [13.95] [8.84] [11.22] [9.55]
Log distance ­0.47*** ­0.39*** ­0.12 ­0.46*** 0.04 0.17* ­0.10* ­0.25*** ­0.16* ­0.30***
[5.67] [5.96] [1.64] [4.76] [0.38] [1.77] [1.75] [4.38] [1.91] [4.56]
Log GDP * Eastern Europe 0.40** ­0.25 0.25 0.28 0.47*** 0.65*** 0.41** 0.17 0.39** 0.44**
[2.25] [1.24] [1.51] [1.44] [3.28] [7.06] [2.09] [1.02] [2.09] [2.32]
Similarity * Eastern Europe 3.92 12.05** 5.24** ­1.15 ­5.39*** 7.35* ­4.75 ­3.77 ­9.42** ­6.54**
[0.72] [1.99] [2.26] [0.38] [3.06] [1.67] [1.19] [1.09] [2.46] [2.16]
Log distance * Eastern Europe ­1.58*** 0.77 ­0.89 ­0.64 ­1.39*** ­2.34*** ­1.25* ­0.62 ­1.12* ­1.35**
[2.60] [1.03] [1.56] [0.85] [2.70] [8.64] [1.75] [1.13] [1.81] [1.98]
Constant ­4.67*** ­9.19*** ­8.30*** ­18.74*** ­1.16 ­2.96* ­8.87*** ­1.78 ­5.85*** ­9.41***
[2.97] [7.98] [7.28] [9.28] [0.67] [1.96] [10.25] [1.55] [4.14] [8.14]
Observations 578 616 719 377 388 488 958 830 719 690
Number of groups 60 60 72 52 48 60 96 94 80 79
27
Table 8: Regression Results Firm-Level Data
Central and Eastern European countries = Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. Core Europe = Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
Central and Eastern European Countries Core Europe
Probit Tobit Probit Tobit
Turnover parent 0.00 0.01*** 0.44*** 0.37*** 0.00 ­0.01*** ­0.01 ­0.331***
[0.82] [3.69] [2.90] [2.69] [0.91] [3.89] [0.13] [4.46]
Log capital intensity of the parent ­0.01 0.14 ­0.01* 0.02
[1.29] [0.66] [1.84] [0.13]
Log capital intensity of the affiliate ­0.06*** ­3.54*** 0.07*** 1.89***
[8.61] [9.70] [6.69] [10.27]
Total number of affiliates of ­0.01 ­0.01 ­1.40*** ­0.48** ­0.02 ­0.02** ­0.56*** ­0.44***
parent [1.36] [0.92] [5.69] [2.14] [1.29] [2.00] [4.14] [3.77]
Affiliate older than 1996 ­2.18*** ­3.69*** 1.78*** 2.20***
[4.25] [7.08] [6.33] [8.28]
State border 27.31*** 25.07*** 0.60*** 0.58*** 11.63*** 10.15***
[16.00] [15.72] [19.06] [19.09] [23.02] [22.27]
Constant ­9.96 ­26.81*** ­8.25 1.70
[1.39] [4.94] [1.42] [0.58]
Observations 8194 7754 8269 7793 8261 7789 8269 7793
28
Table 9: Determinants of the Capital Intensity of the Affiliate
The dependent variable is the capital-labor ratio of the foreign affiliate. The Table presents results of OLS regressions for the year 2003, using robust standard errors. CEEC1 =
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. CEEC3 = Belarus, Bulgaria, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine. Core Europe =
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Turnover parent 0.05***
[7.65]
Assets parent 0.06***
[7.67]
Employment parent 0.06***
[7.67]
Dummy CEEC1 = 1 -0.32*** -0.30*** -0.29*** -0.30***
[10.79] [10.66] [10.31] [10.58]
Dummy CEEC2 = 1 -0.36*** -0.32*** -0.31*** -0.31***
[6.38] [6.31] [6.12] [6.11]
Dummy Core Europe = 1 0.10*** 0.10*** 0.10*** 0.09***
[5.26] [5.63] [5.39] [5.18]
Total number of affiliates -0.06*** -0.06*** -0.07*** 0,01
[5.29] [5.70] [5.95] [0.87]
Log capital-labor ratio parent 0.07*** 0 0.05*** -0,01
[6.82] [0.62] [5.48] [1.54]
Constant -2.82*** -0.86*** -2.67*** -0.63*
[7.28] [2.62] [7.03] [1.89]
Observations 6209 7241 7135 7252
R-squared 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.07
29
Figure 1: Size Distributions of Foreign Affiliates of German Multinational Firms in Eastern and Western Europe, 2003
0 .1 .2 .3
fraction
0 5 10 15
ln(employment)
Density: all Density: only Core Europe
Density: only CEECs
0 .1 .2 .3 .4
fraction
5 10 15 20
ln(sales)
Density: all Density: only Core Europe
Density: only CEECs
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
fraction
5 10 15 20
ln(sales)
All parents Core Europe
CEECs
Cumulative Distribution
IAW-Diskussionspapiere
Bisher erschienen:
Nr. 1
Das Einstiegsgeld ­ eine zielgruppenorientierte negative Einkommensteuer: Konzeption,
Umsetzung und eine erste Zwischenbilanz nach 15 Monaten in Baden-Württemberg
Sabine Dann / Andrea Kirchmann / Alexander Spermann / Jürgen Volkert
Nr. 2
Die Einkommensteuerreform 1990 als natürliches Experiment. Methodische und
konzeptionelle Aspekte zur Schätzung der Elastizität des zu versteuernden Einkommens
Peter Gottfried / Hannes Schellhorn
Nr. 3
Gut betreut in den Arbeitsmarkt? Eine mikroökonomische Evaluation der
Mannheimer Arbeitsvermittlungsagentur
Jürgen Jerger / Christian Pohnke / Alexander Spermann
Nr. 4
Das IAW-Einkommenspanel und das Mikrosimulationsmodell SIMST
Peter Gottfried / Hannes Schellhorn
Nr. 5
A Microeconometric Characterisation of Household Consumption Using
Quantile Regression
Niels Schulze / Gerd Ronning
Nr. 6
Determinanten des Überlebens von Neugründungen in der baden-württembergischen
Industrie ­ eine empirische Survivalanalyse mit amtlichen Betriebsdaten
Harald Strotmann
Nr. 7
Die Baulandausweisungsumlage als ökonomisches Steuerungsinstrument einer
nachhaltigkeitsorientierten Flächenpolitik
Raimund Krumm
Nr. 8
Making Work Pay: U.S. American Models for a German Context?
Laura Chadwick, Jürgen Volkert
Nr. 9
Erste Ergebnisse von vergleichenden Untersuchungen mit anonymisierten und nicht
anonymisierten Einzeldaten am Beispiel der Kostenstrukturerhebung und der Umsatz-
steuerstatistik
Martin Rosemann
Nr. 10
Randomized Response and the Binary Probit Model
Gerd Ronning
Nr. 11
Creating Firms for a New Century: Determinants of Firm Creation around 1900
Joerg Baten
Nr. 12
Das fiskalische BLAU-Konzept zur Begrenzung des Siedlungsflächenwachstums
Raimund Krumm
Nr. 13
Generelle Nichtdiskontierung als Bedingung für eine nachhaltige Entwicklung?
Stefan Bayer
Nr. 14
Die Elastizität des zu versteuernden Einkommens. Messung und erste Ergebnisse zur
empirischen Evidenz für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland.
Peter Gottfried / Hannes Schellhorn
Nr. 15
Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Marginal Tax Rates on Income ­ The German Case
Peter Gottfried / Hannes Schellhorn
Nr. 16
Shadow Economies around the World: What do we really know?
Friedrich Schneider
Nr. 17
Firm Foundations in the Knowledge Intensive Business Service Sector. Results from a
Comparative Empirical Study in Three German Regions
Andreas Koch / Thomas Stahlecker
Nr. 18
The impact of functional integration and spatial proximity on the post-entry performance
of knowledge intensive business service firms
Andreas Koch / Harald Strotmann
Nr. 19
Legislative Malapportionment and the Politicization of Germany's Intergovernmental
Transfer System
Hans Pitlik / Friedrich Schneider / Harald Strotmann
Nr. 20
Implementation ökonomischer Steuerungsansätze in die Raumplanung
Raimund Krumm
Nr. 21
Determinants of Innovative Activity in Newly Founded Knowledge Intensive Business
Service Firms
Andreas Koch / Harald Strotmann
Nr. 22
Impact of Opening Clauses on Bargained Wages
Wolf Dieter Heinbach
Nr. 23
Hat die Einführung von Gewinnbeteiligungsmodellen kurzfristige positive
Produktivitätswirkungen? ­ Ergebnisse eines Propensity-Score-Matching-Ansatzes
Harald Strotmann
Nr. 24
Who Goes East? The Impact of Enlargement on the Pattern of German FDI
Claudia M. Buch / Jörn Kleinert
