261
Copyright 2000 by
The Gerontological Society of America
The Gerontologist
Vol. 40, No. 3, 261­308
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
The Forum
Essays on Age Integration
The Forum is pleased to publish the following essays on age integration, which are adapted from a
working paper issued in May 1999 by the National Institute on Aging. The working paper, one
component of NIA's Program on Age and Structural Change (PASC), was edited by Matilda White
Riley and Peter Uhlenberg from contributions to conferences at the International Sociological
Association (in Montreal) and the American Sociological Association (in San Francisco). Our
purpose is to introduce to a broader readership this important area of inquiry, as well as to
provide specialists with a summary of the current state of the field.
Introduction: Why Study Age Integration?
Peter Uhlenberg, PhD1
Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
One cannot imagine as a practical matter a com-
pletely age-differentiated society in which individuals
exclusively live with and interact with others who are
similar in age. The dependency of infants and chil-
dren on more mature persons for care and nurture
makes extreme segregation by age impossible, and
kinship ties generally operate to link persons of differ-
ent ages. By contrast, it is equally unlikely that any so-
ciety would be completely age integrated, with the
ages of those who live together and interact with each
other being randomly distributed. Observing the age
composition of members of schools, work organiza-
tions, sports teams, and nursing homes convinces one
that pervasive age segregation occurs in at least some
segments of contemporary society. Rather than think-
ing of age integration as a dichotomy (integrated vs
differentiated), it is more useful to think of age integra-
tion as a continuum. Some societies may be more age
integrated than others. Degree of age integration may
increase or decrease in a society over time. Some
structures within a society may be more age inte-
grated than others. And some individuals may experi-
ence more age-integrated lives than others.
Before proceeding to discuss how we might delin-
eate the study of age integration, two preliminary
questions must be addressed. First, what is meant by
"age integration"? Although "integration" and "differ-
entiation" (or "segregation") are common terms, it is
important to make clear what we have in mind when
we use these terms. Second, why is age integration
an interesting and important area for study? To be
sure, the consequences of age integration are not
well understood at this time, suggesting that this is a
priority area for research. Nevertheless, we do know
enough to indicate reasons why this topic merits at-
tention. After considering these two questions, this
introduction explores some of the issues that arise
when one begins to study special aspects of age inte-
gration and differentiation, thus setting the stage for
the widely varied essays that follow.
Meaning of Age Integration
An age-integrated structure may be defined as one
that does not use chronological age as a criterion for
entrance, exit, or participation. Conversely, when a
structure makes use of age criteria as barriers, it is, to
some extent, age segregated. Barriers to age integration
may, in many ways, be similar to those that produced
racial segregation. Because of racial classification, Afri-
262 The Gerontologist
can Americans have been prevented from living in
some neighborhoods; from attending some schools,
clubs, and churches; from using some public facilities;
and from working in some occupations and at some
work sites. Not only explicit laws and policies, but also
informal norms and prejudices, have promoted these
types of racial segregation. When studying age integra-
tion, it will be useful to consider the extent to which
formal and informal barriers similarly restrict opportu-
nities for individuals of different ages to live together,
work together, learn together, recreate together, wor-
ship together, and socialize together.
As emphasized by Matilda and John Riley in the
next essay, "Conceptual and Historical Background,"
however, the absence of structural age barriers is
only one component of age integration. The other
component concerns interactions among persons of
different ages. Again, an analogy to racial integration
is useful in clarifying what is meant by this aspect of
age integration. Removing or reducing racial barriers
to entering neighborhoods, schools, and other struc-
tures may have provided opportunities for increased
integration, although in fact many individuals have
little or no interaction with members of other races.
When an individual's interactions largely occur within
one racial group, it is clear that he/she is not fully
integrated. And when most individuals have limited
interactions with members of differing racial groups,
the society remains divided along racial lines. In think-
ing about age integration, therefore, questions should
be asked about the distribution of interactions across
age strata. A strong propensity for individuals to in-
teract exclusively with age peers would indicate age
segregation. It is only when they interact with others
who differ in age that age integration occurs.
The two components of age integration, absence
of structural age barriers and presence of cross-age
interactions, are often related. For example, one can
imagine that age barriers would limit opportunities
for cross-age interaction, and that significant interac-
tions across age strata would reduce support for age
barriers. Nevertheless, it is useful to make a distinc-
tion between these two aspects of age integration and
to consider how each functions from the perspective
of individuals, social organizations, and societies. In-
dividuals may differ in the extent to which they en-
counter structural age barriers, and may differ in fre-
quency of interacting with persons of different ages.
Organizations may differ in the extent to which they
use age as a criterion for membership or participa-
tion, and may differ in the extent to which their mem-
berships are age heterogeneous. Societies may differ
in how prevalent various types of age barriers are,
and may differ in how frequently persons of different
ages interact with each other.
Significance of Age Integration
Compared to race and sex segregation, age segre-
gation has not yet become a very salient social or po-
litical issue. In many ways we are not yet aware of
the implications of the unprecedented addition of
new strata of older people that are reshaping the pop-
ulation and the society. Much current conventional
wisdom no doubt holds that age segregation is either
"natural" or simply reflects individual preferences. If
age segregation were indeed unproblematic and had
no significant consequences for individuals or the so-
ciety, then there would be no compelling reason why
social researchers should give it serious attention.
Not surprisingly, however, we think that age segrega-
tion is neither natural nor benign. We expect that
careful study will uncover a range of significant so-
cial forces that influence how much age segregation
or age integration occurs. Further, it is likely that age
segregation significantly shapes the ways in which
people grow up and grow old, and that changes to-
ward greater age integration may be both feasible
and consequential.
Potentially significant ways in which age integra-
tion may affect individuals or society include the fol-
lowing:
Life Course Flexibility.--Martin Kohli (1988) has
called attention to increases over the past century in
the "chronologization" of life--the use of age to de-
termine what activities individuals will engage in. In
a variety of ways the state, work organizations, and
schools seized upon age as a criterion for determin-
ing who was entitled to and who was disqualified
from participating in particular activities or programs.
Age barriers thus produced a standard life course that
is separated into three boxes: education for young
people, work for adults who are not old, and leisure
for the old. A number of researchers have called at-
tention to negative consequences of this rigid life
course organization, which identifies particular activ-
ities with particular life stages. Matilda White Riley
and others (Riley, Foner, & Riley, 1999), have pro-
posed an alternative model that would allow learning
and work and leisure to be integrated in the lives of
individuals throughout the entire life course. A cru-
cial requirement for developing this more flexible ap-
proach to life course organization is age integra-
tion--removing or reducing age barriers that restrict
access to various structures.
Extent of Ageism.--Most persons find it easy to
produce a substantial list of word associations for the
terms "adolescent" or "old person." These associa-
tions tend to be negative and reflect widespread age
stereotypes. Ageism might be expected to flourish in
an environment where significant cross-age interac-
tions are uncommon. In contrast, we might expect
that when individuals of diverse ages interact and
work together (age integration), age stereotypes and
prejudices are reduced.
Productive Aging.--Although the general theory of
social "disengagement" is flawed and has been aban-
doned by social gerontologists, concerns over the
issue of productive aging persist. In fact, there is
widespread disengagement from productive activities
(work, volunteering, and caregiving) by older persons
in contemporary society. Removing age barriers that
263
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
limit the participation of older persons in work and
volunteer organizations could increase the contribu-
tions to societal welfare by those in later life (Uhlen-
berg, 1996). But the potential of age integration to in-
crease productive engagement in the society need
not apply only to older persons. Increasing the inte-
gration between adolescents and younger children
and older persons might increase opportunities for
adolescents to be productive members of the society.
Civility.--Many important discussions of intergen-
erational equity raise the prospect that the population
could be divided into competing groups based on
age. On the one hand, conflict across age groups
could develop if age is perceived as unfairly used by
the government as a criterion for the redistribution of
resources. One example of an age group that might
possibly abuse its power is the American Association
of Retired Persons (AARP), among the largest volun-
tary organizations in the country. Further, the ab-
sence of friendships and collaboration among per-
sons of different ages tends to reduce the feelings of
common purpose and unity among members of the
society. On the other hand, reducing age barriers and
increasing cross-age interactions--age integration--
may be an effective way of reducing fragmentation
and thus promoting a more civil society. A remark-
able effort to reduce age barriers is Generations
United, which began in 1986 when the National
Council on Aging joined forces with the Child Wel-
fare League of America. This overarching movement
now includes more than 100 national organizations
seeking mutually supportive agendas (Generations,
Winter 1998­99, p. 14).
Social Settings for Age Integration
There is value in general discussions of age inte-
gration in society, but progress in understanding this
topic will require a great deal of empirical research
focused on specific aspects of age integration. An ap-
proach that has proven useful in the study of racial
integration is to focus on specific structures or social
settings in which racial segregation or integration
seems especially consequential. For example, racial
segregation in housing, work, and education has far-
reaching implications for perpetuating inequality across
races. Similarly, detailed studies of age segregation
and integration in the following areas promise to pro-
vide insights related to differences and inequalities
across age strata:
Households and Neighborhoods.--The environment
within which individuals live shapes how they de-
velop and influences the resources and opportunities
available to them. These living conditions can be ex-
amined at two levels. First, who are the others, if any,
who share the living space? For example, do older
persons live with children or older persons in the
household? Are young children growing up with ado-
lescent siblings or grandparents living in their fami-
lies? For those outside of households, how age homo-
geneous is the living space (dormitory, nursing home,
prison, etc.)?
Second, what is the age composition of the pop-
ulation in the neighborhood? The importance of
neighborhood age composition is, of course, some-
thing to be examined rather than assumed. But the
range of possibilities is large. Some neighborhoods
are highly age segregated, either intentionally (as in
retirement communities or college housing), or be-
cause other forces lead to indirect differentiation
(e.g., apartment complexes designed to attract young
professionals without children, rural communities
where most young people have moved out, or public
housing intended for families with children). Other
neighborhoods may have fairly equal representation
of all ages, or may have more or less skewed age dis-
tributions.
Work.--A great deal has been written on age bar-
riers affecting work opportunities. Work options for
young people obviously are restricted by child labor
laws, and apprenticeships as a mechanism for inte-
grating younger and older workers are no longer
common in the United States. Although generally il-
legal, age discrimination also operates to limit the
work options of older persons. Equally important,
pension incentives and normative pressures encour-
age older persons to exit the workforce. Thus, issues
of age integration in work structures are especially
relevant for persons at both ends of the age spectrum.
One important debate that needs to be informed by
research concerns employment of adolescents. What
are the implications of young people being involved
in work, and how do consequences of employment
differ by type of work and supervisory experience?
For older persons, research needs to continue to ex-
amine the forces that influence labor force participa-
tion and to explore ways to expand opportunities and
incentives for working.
In addition to age discrimination, research on age
integration might examine work as an opportunity for
cross-age interactions. How and why does age com-
position differ across various occupations and work
sites? Does working in an age-integrated environ-
ment tend to reduce stereotypes and prejudices
based on age and promote cross-age friendships? In
what situations does conflict develop between older
and younger workers (e.g., over questions of seniority
and privilege)? How common are mentoring relation-
ships where older workers help younger colleagues
to develop skills and confidence?
Education.--Probably nowhere in the society is
age grading so obvious as in many current school
systems in the United States. Starting around age 5,
children are grouped together with others of the same
age, and those who are "normal" are expected to
march through grades together. Research is needed
to examine the forces that maintain this system and
whether there is merit in more age-integrated ap-
proaches to educating children. For example, what
opportunities for learning are created by having chil-
264 The Gerontologist
dren of different ages help each other? Increasing age
integration in recent decades has been reported for
colleges and universities, including graduate schools
and professional schools. But we need to know more
about age barriers that still exist and the experiences
of nontraditional students, both when they are in
school and after they leave.
If the division of the life course into three boxes is
to be replaced with a less age-restrictive model, edu-
cation must become increasingly accessible to mid-
dle-aged and older persons. Without lifelong learn-
ing, it is inevitable that persons in a rapidly changing
society will become increasingly obsolete as they age
through the adult years. Expanding age integration
for traditional education in classroom settings may
play some role in promoting learning among the non-
young. More important, however, is research and ex-
perimentation in alternative ways of motivating and
enabling adults to pursue learning throughout life.
Politics.--Beyond the minimum age for voting and
for holding some political offices, there are no formal
age barriers to political participation. Nevertheless,
age integration in politics is a potentially interesting
area for research. One important topic involves politi-
cal activities that cut across age strata and foster cross-
age interaction. A primary issue here concerns the use
of age in special interest politics. Much has been writ-
ten regarding the role of the "gray lobby" and age pol-
itics in preserving, or expanding, government pro-
grams for older citizens. It is likely that interest in this
issue will expand as the population rapidly ages after
the year 2010. Discussions of age integration also
bring into question the use of chronological age as a
basis for special entitlements, which are a prominent
feature of the welfare state. One could argue that using
an age criterion becomes an age barrier that keeps
non-old persons from enjoying benefits of income
maintenance and health care access programs.
Health Care.--As health care has become a domi-
nant structure in modern society, access to health
care and quality of health care have become increas-
ingly important social issues. In the United States, for
example, attention has been given to the large num-
ber (40 million) of persons without health insurance
and the large social class differences in quality of
care received. Research on the relationship between
age integration and delivery of health care could ex-
plore several issues. First, what are the implications
of the age grading produced by Medicare, which
guarantees health insurance only for older persons?
Second, what are the consequences of ageism in the
medical profession, where numerous reports suggest
that younger people are preferred over older people
as patients? Third, should age be used as a criterion
in rationing medical resources? (Is it cost effective to
use resources on the very old? How much should be
spent trying to keep very premature babies alive?)
Other Social Settings.--Age integration and age
segregation occur in a variety of social settings and
structures beyond those mentioned above. Recent
studies of religion suggest that church involvement is
an important social activity for many persons of all
ages. Church meetings offer an opportunity for per-
sons of different ages to interact in worship and min-
istry, but it is possible that churches often promote
age segregation. Research is needed on the extent to
which churches use age to group individuals into dif-
ferent classes and activities (youth group, young
adult singles, senior citizens, etc.).
More generally, how important are family reunions
as a mechanism encouraging meaningful cross-age
interaction? Does the age segregation associated with
publicly sponsored senior centers and youth centers
hinder cross-age interactions? How important is the
mixing of ages that occurs at street fairs and sporting
events?
Types of Interactions
While interaction among persons of different ages
is a central aspect of age integration, the meaning and
significance of cross-age interaction can vary widely
depending on the nature of the interaction. For exam-
ple, an interaction between a 20-year-old and a 70-
year-old does not mean the same thing when it in-
volves one serving the other a hamburger in a fast
food establishment as when it is part of an enduring,
intimate relationship. To advance the study of age in-
tegration, therefore, it will be necessary to examine
implications of various types of interaction.
Among the relevant dimensions along which
cross-age interactions may be classified are the fol-
lowing:
· Duration. Interactions may range from brief, one-
time exchanges to frequent prolonged encounters
over a long time period.
· Equality. Interactions may range from those be-
tween persons of equal status to those involving a
high degree of subordination and superordina-
tion.
· Intimacy. Interactions may range from impersonal,
task-oriented encounters to intimate relations.
· Complexity. Interactions may range from those
with a single-task focus to those that encompass
many aspects of life.
· Cooperation. Interactions may range from positive,
mutually beneficial relationships to antagonistic,
conflictual exchanges.
The importance of making such distinctions as these
becomes apparent when specific questions are formu-
lated. For example, one might hypothesize that age in-
tegration would tend to reduce ageist stereotypes that
adolescents have of old people, and vice versa. To ex-
amine this hypothesis, however, it is important to con-
sider different possible types of interaction. For exam-
ple, one can imagine negative interactions that would,
in fact, drive a wedge between older and younger
persons. Bringing adolescents into a nursing home to
265
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
interact with the residents may reinforce all of the
negative views that young people have of aging. Simi-
larly, old people's preexisting negative views of teen-
agers may be reinforced when teenagers wait on them
at a fast food restaurant. On the other hand, bringing
together old and young people with similar interests
to work on a long-term project might help break
down age barriers to friendship and lead to substan-
tial changes in negative ageist stereotypes. In general,
one might anticipate that the types of interactions
leading to more positive outcomes would involve sus-
tained relationships that involve a good deal of equal-
ity, intimacy, and cooperation.
Essays
In 1998, Matilda and John Riley organized ses-
sions on age integration at both the International So-
ciological Association meeting in Montreal and the
American Sociological Association meeting in San
Francisco. After their discussion of age integration's
conceptual and historical background, most of the
essays that follow are adapted from presentations at
these two sessions and illustrate current directions of
research and thinking on this topic. Each author de-
velops a facet of age integration that is related to his/
her research interests. The result is a diverse set of es-
says representing a range of perspectives and focus-
ing on a variety of issues. Further, because the au-
thors are from five different countries, they represent
work going on in a number of societies.
One theme in these essays concerns mechanisms
that mediate between age strata. Based on research in
three-generation families in France, Attias-Donfut ex-
plores ways in which exchanges between generations,
both economic and social, work to reduce inequality
and differences across age strata. Of special interest is
the potential diffusion of social change (values and life-
styles) to older persons through their interactions with
younger family members. She writes, "The confronta-
tion between generations that have different values
creates zones of family influence." In this way the fam-
ily brings people of different ages together and thereby
facilitates age integration. Foner also identifies mecha-
nisms within the family (related to bonds based on af-
fection and exchanges) that promote age integration in
the larger society. She argues that these microlevel
processes are the reason why "age wars" have not
erupted over the growing economic burden on young
people, who pay taxes to support the social welfare
programs benefiting the older generations.
Uhlenberg extends the discussion of the impor-
tance of kin ties to the link between older people and
children (grandparents and grandchildren), and the
valuable contribution made by some older people in
rearing their grandchildren. In addition, he calls at-
tention to programs in the United States that explic-
itly promote interaction between older people and
children. These programs demonstrate how age inte-
gration can enhance the lives of both older and
younger persons. Kohli broadens further our under-
standing of how organizations might mediate be-
tween age strata by looking at labor unions and polit-
ical parties. A related issue is raised in Dannefer's
discussion of how changes in education and work
are encouraging greater age integration. Comparing
recent developments in Germany and the United
States, Dannefer argues that changes in both societies
are encouraging increased flexibility in the organiza-
tion of the life course. How work organizations, edu-
cational institutions, and government policies re-
spond to the challenges of global change, however,
will affect whether, and to what extent, age integra-
tion may be beneficial for individuals.
Attention to the relationship between the organiza-
tion of work and age integration is found in many of
these essays and is the primary focus of two of them.
Over most of the 20th century the prevalence of retire-
ment among the older population has been increasing,
resulting in the growth of age differentiation in the
workplace. Henretta asks whether this trend may have
run its course, and whether we can expect increasing
employment of older people in the future. He exam-
ines the preferences of those approaching old age, and
finds that most say they would prefer to continue do-
ing some paid work after they retire. In addition, he
sees a number of changes occurring that will expand
the number of flexible jobs available for older workers
in coming years. Consequently, he suggests that it is
likely that employment age segregation will decrease
over the next several decades. Increasing job flexibility
also is of interest to Loscocco, who makes a case for
distributing work more evenly over the life course. In
particular, she focuses on problems created by the
dominance of work over family and leisure in the mid-
dle years and the lack of work options in the later
years of life. She suggests ways in which a more age-
integrated life course could strengthen families and
enrich lives of people of all ages.
The complexities and contradictions of moving
toward fuller age integration cannot be ignored. It is
unlikely that a fully age-integrated approach to social
policy, with no distinctions based on age, would gen-
erally be favored by older persons. Ignoring age
would threaten the special benefits based on age
that older persons have gained in recent years.
Guillemard, who speaks of European societies as
"schizophrenic" regarding age integration, notes other
complications. On one hand, concern over social
welfare expenses has led to calls for postponing re-
tirement age. In line with this, flexible and gradual
retirement plans are developing, and training and ed-
ucation programs are increasingly open to people of
all ages. On the other hand, discrimination against
older workers is widely practiced and justified be-
cause of high unemployment and the employment
needs of younger persons. In this context, workers in
their forties are deemed too old to be retrained. Writ-
ing on current conditions in The Netherlands, Baars
also is struck by the contradictory evidence regarding
trends toward age integration. Increasingly, older
people are found taking courses at the university,
working alongside younger people in the "gray sec-
tor" of unofficial jobs where paying taxes is avoided,
266 The Gerontologist
and volunteering in age-integrated settings. But in the
central economic sector of official work, people may
be defined as "old" by age 45, and mandatory retire-
ment by age 65 is the norm.
The concluding essay, by Walker, discusses ways
in which public policy has encouraged age segrega-
tion over much of the 20th century, and the potential
for public policy to facilitate greater age integration
in the future. In other words, current public policy
choices will have significant implications for the
level of age integration experienced by cohorts aging
in coming years. This recognition of both the impor-
tance of and the uncertainty of the future course of
age integration is an appropriate note with which to
conclude these essays. Our hope is that many aging
professionals will recognize the value of giving more
attention to this stimulating and significant issue in
their work.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Peter Uhlenberg, University of North Caro-
lina, CB#3210, Department of Sociology, Chapel Hill, NC 27599. E-mail:
peter_uhlenberg@unc.edu
References
Kohli, M. L. (1988). Social organization and subjective construction of the
life course. In A. B. Sorensen, F. E. Weiner, & L. R. Sherrod (Eds.), Hu-
man development and the life cycle (pp. 271­292). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Riley, M. W., Foner, A., & Riley, J. W., Jr. (1999). The aging and society
paradigm. In V. L. Bengtson, & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of theo-
ries of aging (pp. 327­343). New York: Springer.
Uhlenberg, P. (1996). The burden of aging: A theoretical framework for
understanding the shifting balance of caregiving and care receiving as
cohorts age. The Gerontologist, 36, 761­767.
Age Integration: Conceptual and Historical Background
Matilda White Riley, ScD,1 and John W. Riley, Jr., PhD2
1National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
2Consulting Sociologist, Chevy Chase, Maryland.
Age integration has many faces, involving com-
plex issues related to the absence of structural age
barriers and the interactions among persons of differ-
ent ages. This complexity is illustrated in the intro-
duction by Peter Uhlenberg and in the varied essays
in this working paper. Underlying the complexity,
however, is a common conceptual development, to
which past research has contributed and on which
future research can build. Understanding this com-
monality is basic to the central questions raised in
this working paper: Are tendencies toward age inte-
gration currently increasing? And, if so, what are pos-
sible consequences for the future?
These questions were already familiar in the
1970s, when we were alerted to pressures for struc-
tural change by the steadily increasing numbers of
people in the older age strata, coincident with the
many baby boomers in the younger age strata. To-
day, these pressures are strengthened by still further
dramatic additions to the oldest strata, as studies now
predict that increasingly the oldest old may survive to
age 100 or more (e.g., Vaupel & Jeune, 1994). Faced
with this prospect, we expect a growing number of
older people to resist age constraints on paid work
and ageist biases against active participation in the
society. Pressures to relax age barriers may also come
from other strata. Very young people may want ear-
lier and earlier access to "adult" roles in work, fam-
ily, and entertainment. Pressures may come also from
middle-aged people, who are caught between senior-
ity-graded work requirements and the age-related de-
mands of kin and household. Peter Uhlenberg has
discussed the potentials of studying these pressures
in a range of settings: households, neighborhoods,
work, education, politics, and health care.
Are such pressures the forerunners of age integra-
tion? Have they been serving to reduce the lag of so-
cial structures behind the skyrocketing numbers of
competent people of every age (Riley, Kahn, & Foner,
1994)? And what of the future, as the lag now some-
times tends in the opposite direction, with people
lagging behind structural change? Will an emerging
age integration help people to catch up with the glo-
bal metamorphoses in communication, trade, and
conflict? Powerful discussions of these questions are
presented in the following essays, discussions aimed
to stimulate awareness of age integration throughout
the world.
As background for these essays, we shall review
three aspects of age integration as potential contribu-
tions to its common understanding: (1) continuing
conceptual development, (2) the relevance of past re-
search, and (3) some implications for the future.
Conceptualization
Ideal Types of Structures.--The developing concep-
tualization of age integration, as now widely ac-
cepted, has been aided by the two "ideal types" of
social structure schematized in Figure 1 (Riley, M. W.,
Foner, & Riley, J. W., 1999; Riley, M. W., & Riley,
J. W., 1994). For contrast, at the left of the figure are
267
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
"age-differentiated structures," those which are di-
vided by age into the familiar "three boxes" of educa-
tion for the young, work and family responsibilities
for the middle-aged, and leisure in retirement for the
old. The "age-integrated structures" of special con-
cern, at the right, are those in which the age bound-
aries have been removed or made flexible. While
these are "ideal types" in the Weberian sense that
they never exist in reality, tendencies toward both
types occur in all societies, but to markedly differing
degrees. In the recent past, tendencies toward age-
graded structures had in fact approximated the age
differentiated model: they had been so widespread as
to be largely taken for granted as "normal." Today,
by contrast, numerous tendencies toward age inte-
gration can be detected in educational institutions,
work organizations, families, and other structures.
Components of Age-Integrated Structures.-- As
pointed out in Uhlenberg's introduction, age integration
has been defined loosely as having two components:
(A) Breaking down structural age barriers (as role op-
portunities in work, education, and other structures
are more and more open to people of every age);
and
(B) Bringing together people who differ in age (e.g.,
lifelong education could mean that old and
young are students together).
However, widespread experience in using the
concept of age integration over the years now points
to the need for a fuller specification of both compo-
nents. Clearly, if not yet explicitly, A and B are quite
distinct components of structures, and each has asso-
ciated implications for the lives of individuals. Thus,
a fuller formulation of age integration would be:
Components of Age-Integrated Structures
A. Flexible age criteria
For individuals--"flexible lives"
B. Age heterogeneity
For individuals--"cross-age interaction"
Component A (breaking down age barriers) has
long been widely familiar:
· For particular structures, "flexible age criteria"
means that entry, exit, and performance are not
constrained by age. That is, age is no longer a rigid
barrier to access.
· For individuals, the implication of these flexible
criteria is that "flexible lives" are possible. That is,
individuals have opportunities over their long lives
to intersperse periods of education, work, family
time, leisure, and other options.
Less familiar is Component B (bringing people of
all ages together):
· For structures, "age heterogeneity" means that the
aggregate (or cross-section) of people within par-
ticular structures differ in age, cohort membership,
and the accompaniments.
· For individuals, the implication of age heterogene-
ity is "cross-age interaction." That is, individuals
have increased opportunities to interact with oth-
ers who differ in age.
Of course, these two components, although dis-
tinct, are interdependent. For example, starting with A,
whenever particular structures (such as work organiza-
tions or educational systems) open their doors to peo-
ple regardless of age, the likely consequence (B) is that
people of diverse ages will be included in each struc-
ture. Or conversely, starting with B, when old and
young confront each other in the same work organiza-
tion or educational system, then the age boundaries of
these structures are likely to become institutionalized
as more flexible (A).
The important point here is that both components,
with their distinctive implications, are essential for
understanding age integration.
Past Research
Strange as it seems, however, past research has
tended to separate the two components. Of the two,
the familiar Component A has received far greater at-
tention than has the equally important Component B.
Component A. Flexibility of Criteria and Lives
Impressive scholarship has been devoted to explor-
ing the breakdown of structural age barriers and the
Figure 1. Ideal types of social structures.
268 The Gerontologist
consequent flexibility of the individual life course.
We ourselves have worked on this component to-
gether with many contributors to this working paper
at international meetings in Acapulco (1989), Madrid
(1990), Stockholm (1992), and Budapest (1993) (see
Riley, J. W., & Riley, M. W., 1994; Riley, M. W., &
Riley, J. W., 1999). In the 1970s, splendid treatments
of this topic were published by Gusta Rehn, Fred Best,
Anne-Marie Guillemard, Martin Kohli, Jack Habib,
Charlotte Nusberg, and others. So widespread was the
interest that, in 1977, a conference on "the three
boxes" attracted hundreds of attendees.
Social Changes.--Along with these conceptual de-
velopments have come numerous actual tendencies
toward flexibility of boundaries and lives. Perhaps
most apparent are changes in education. Thirty years
ago Lowell Eklund (1969) had stressed the special sa-
lience for human development of educational re-
structuring, from kindergarten through programs for
the aged. Today, in the United States, education has
indeed become increasingly age-integrated and is
widely defined as "lifelong." Moreover, there are
scattered tendencies for age barriers to become re-
laxed in other structures: for example, in work
(where, in the United States, a large minority of high
school students have jobs), and in the family (where
kinship boundaries now embrace great-grandparents,
even great-great-grandparents). Of course, there are
also countertendencies in the United States and else-
where, as in age-defined programs in medicine and
welfare.
Costs and Benefits.--Both negative and positive
features of relaxed age barriers have been explored in
numerous studies. Among the perceived disadvan-
tages is fear of change: change in everyday lives, in
vested interests, and in the sense of economic secu-
rity provided by the "three boxes." Studies have also
pointed to failures of the new age-related opportuni-
ties in education or work to overcome class and eth-
nic inequalities or the struggle of many isolated older
people in the United States to pay for both rent and
food. At the same time, however, flexibility affords
benefits: It enhances opportunities and freedom of
choice for a great many individuals of all ages, and it
may facilitate structural adaptation to global trends in
technology, trade, or health.
Component B. Age Heterogeneity and
Cross-age Interactions
Far less conceptual and research attention has
been paid to Component B, the increasing age heter-
ogeneity of people alive at any one time, and the
consequent opportunities for cross-age interactions.
Despite the long-standing prevalence of such cross-
age interactions as parenting, teaching, or research
collaboration, they have not been a major focus of
theories of age. Among the exceptions is Robert Mer-
ton's remark, in relating science to age, that: "Some
basic functions are served through institutional ar-
rangements involving interactions between age strata
rather than separation of them." (Zuckerman & Mer-
ton, 1972, p. 338).
Implications of Age Heterogeneity.--While theorists
have been looking elsewhere, most social structures,
and developed societies as a whole, are being in-
creasingly pervaded by age heterogeneity and its
consequences. Consider the fact that, for the first
time in history, the people alive at any one time now
include remarkably large numbers in the strata aged
65 to 100 or more. Consider also the unprecedented
heterogeneity of these many age strata--heterogene-
ity not only in number and size (cf. Waring, 1975),
but heterogeneity also in biological functioning; in
accumulated experiences; in variety of ethnic, racial,
and socioeconomic backgrounds; and in cohort ex-
posure to the changing events and cultures of succes-
sive historical eras.
While the full effects of this mounting age hetero-
geneity are not yet known, its meaning is gradually
becoming clearer. It means increasing opportunities
for "cross-age interaction"--as in the United States
new forms of mentorship and apprenticeship have
been gradually crystallizing. We see college students
teaching fifth-graders or isolated old folks; people
in nursing homes teaching kindergartners; younger
workers learning from experienced elders or, in turn,
teaching high-tech skills to their elders; grandparents
and grandchildren socializing each other; or "inter-
generational partnerships" in which school children
and older people interact in institutional settings.
Costs and Benefits.--Such interactions across age
and generation have well-known disadvantages as
well as benefits. Some people prefer the company of
age peers, with whom they are likely to share beliefs
and interests, as Irving Rosow showed in 1967 for
older people and Beth Hess in 1972 for adolescents.
At the same time, relationships with others who differ
in age have such benefits as: stimulating wider partic-
ipation, encouraging the sharing of responsibilities,
and preserving the heritage of the past (see Riley,
1998). Perhaps the most significant benefit accrues
from reciprocal education and training which, again
in Merton's 1972 analysis of age (p. 338), refers both
to "the narrow sense of transmission of knowledge
and skills and [to] the broader sense of socialization
involving the transmission of values, attitudes, inter-
ests, and role-defined behaviors."
Contributions of Separate Strands
What does this past history tell us? One striking
finding stands out: Ironically, with increasing integra-
tion, age in itself becomes less significant in Compo-
nent A, but more significant in Component B. Age
becomes less important in Component A because it is
no longer a rigid criterion for entry, exit, and perfor-
mance in structures, whereas in Component B it be-
comes highly important because the mounting num-
bers of coexisting age strata emphasize the many
269
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
age- and cohort-related differences among them.
When Bernice Neugarten spoke of "age irrelevance,"
she clearly was thinking of Component A.
More generally, the past history shows that the
strands of research on Components A and B, even
though separated, have made complementary contri-
butions to our common understanding of age integra-
tion.
The Future
Looking toward the future, it seems likely that re-
search toward a fuller understanding of age integra-
tion will no longer separate the two components of
"flexibility" and "age heterogeneity," but will exam-
ine them together. As early as 1974 one little-known
study of education foreshadowed the heuristic value
of combining the two components. For both youth
and old people, as the rigid boundaries of schooling,
work, and leisure were already relaxing, the resultant
relationships between young and old were seen to
foster reciprocal socialization, and to encourage
sharing the high energy of youth with the accumu-
lated experience of old age (Riley, 1974). Today it is
clear that the mounting numbers of older people
would place an intolerable burden on younger peo-
ple, unless age integration gives older people the op-
portunity to carry a share of the burden.
Incipient Changes.--For future investigation of the
complementary components of age integration, a
spate of social changes is already emerging. For ex-
ample, the boundaries between childhood and adult-
hood are becoming blurred in labor laws and the
justice system. Research on the malleability of infant
brains is calling for new types of communication be-
tween mother and baby, just as the gerontological
community is calling for more active relationships
between adults and their aged parents. Baby-boom
parents are reported to take greater interest in their
adolescent children than did the preceding cohorts.
Communities are being designed with the express
purpose of integrating the generations; and colleges
are affiliating with nearby retirement communities.
Thousands of retired executives are providing ad-
vice to small businesses. Even the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services is urging employees
to spend one lunch hour a week reading a book
one-on-one with a first- to sixth-grade student. And
so on.
Tracing such developments into the future will
yield new insights into the nature of age integration.
Constraints on Prediction.--In contemplating the
future, of course we cannot simply make projections
from the past. Changes in age flexibility (A) and age
heterogeneity (B) are unpredictable, and each of the
two will influence the other in unknown ways. Most
importantly, we cannot foresee the consequences of
global changes in technology, economics, migration,
or health. If in the past social structures have lagged
behind the improvements in people's lives, the
world-wide metamorphoses today suggest, by con-
trast, that we are now facing a "people lag," and age
integration appears central to the reversal. For, if
structural lag led to age integration in the past, in the
future the flexibilities of age integration in turn may
well facilitate adaptation of both people and struc-
tures to the overarching world changes.
Future Contingencies.--As one possible future sce-
nario, suppose that the tendencies toward age inte-
gration increase, along with deeper understanding of
the combined components. Would not this outcome
call attention to some of the most basic issues of the
future?
To what extent might flexible age criteria provide
more equitable opportunities to people of all back-
grounds and creeds?
Might cross-age interaction lead to group solidar-
ity and a sense of community across all age strata,
thus reducing the threats of misunderstanding, ten-
sion, and intergenerational conflict? As one small ex-
ample, if old people read to children from Mother
Goose or stories from the Bible or Shakespeare, this
transmission of the heritage from their generation
could provide images and figures of speech to aid
communication among generations.
Might the experience with age integration affect
the image of a "good society" and, as Peter Uhlen-
berg suggests, lead to a more productive and a more
civil society? Might societal values gradually shift, if
the old become accustomed to sharing with the mid-
dle-aged some of their responsibilities for work and
family, in exchange for leisure time for cultural pur-
suits, adventure, and recreation? Might today's em-
phases on consumerism and material rewards give
way to strengthened emphases on "connectedness"
among all ages?
Predictably, as future studies delve more deeply
into the complementarity between "flexibility" and
"age heterogeneity," they will amplify the common
understandings of the power of age.
Acknowledgments
This essay is in the public domain.
Address correspondence to Matilda White Riley, ScD, National Insti-
tutes of Health, Scientist Emeritus, National Institute on Aging, Gateway
Bldg 2C227, 7201 Wisconsin Ave., Bethesda, MD 20892.
References
Eklund, L. (1969). Aging and the field of education. In M. W. Riley, J. W.
Riley, & M. E. Johnson (Eds.), Aging and society (Vol. II. pp. 324­351).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hess, B. (1972). Friendship. In M. W. Riley, M. Johnson, & A. Foner (Eds.),
Aging and society (Vol. III, pp. 357­393). New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Riley, J. W., Jr., & Riley, M. W. (1994). Beyond productive aging: Chang-
ing lives and changing structures. Ageing International, June, 15­19.
Riley, M. W. (1974). The perspective of age stratification, for the Report on
transition to adulthood, the President's Scientific Advisory Committee.
School Review, 88, 58­91.
Riley, M. W. (1998). The hidden age revolution: Emergent integration of all
ages. Policy Brief. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University.
Riley, M. W., Foner, A., & Riley, J. W., Jr. (1999). The aging and society
paradigm. In V. L. Bengtson, & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of theo-
ries of aging (pp. 327­343). New York: Springer.
Riley, M. W., Kahn, R. L., & Foner, A. (1994). Age and structural lag: Soci-
270 The Gerontologist
ety's failure to provide meaningful opportunities in work, family, and
leisure. New York: Wiley.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W., Jr. (1994). Age integration and the lives of
older people. The Gerontologist, 34, 110­115.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W. Jr. (1999). Sociological research on age. Age-
ing and Society, 19, 123­135.
Rosow, I. (1967). Social integration of the aged. New York: Free Press.
Vaupel, J. W., & Jeune, B. (1994). The emergence and proliferation of cen-
tenarians. Population Studies of Aging, No. 12. Odense, Denmark:
Odense University.
Waring, J. M. (1975). Social replenishment and social change: The prob-
lem of disordered cohort flow. American Behavioral Scientist, 19, 237­
256.
Zuckerman, H., & Merton, R. K. (1972). Age, aging, and age structure in
science. In M. W. Riley, M. Johnson, & A. Foner (Eds.), Aging and soci-
ety (Vol. III, pp. 292­356. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Cultural and Economic Transfers Between Generations: One
Aspect of Age Integration
Claudine Attias-Donfut, PhD
Research Department, National Pensions Fund for Social Security, Paris, France.
Following Durkheim (1975), the family can be de-
fined as an institution that articulates gender and gen-
erational differences (Thery, 1996). The profound
transformation that took place within the family be-
tween 1965 and 1975 has affected gender and gener-
ational relations in every domain--economic, social,
biological, and demographic. It is particularly inter-
esting to analyze these transformations from the gen-
eral perspective of age integration, which is at the
center of this program. All research on the family ap-
pearing at the end of the 20th century emphasizes
the changing family calendar that is linked to new
types of conjugal relationships. There is a steady and
continual decline in the number of marriages, an in-
crease in divorces, a delay in procreation, and a fall
in fertility rates. The parental role is changing, and ed-
ucational models are becoming less rigid. The child
becomes a mirror of "us," an expression of love be-
tween couples. The "moral family" is now finished,
and in its place we have the "relational family" (de
Singly, 1996). The new qualities of parent/child rela-
tionships are characterized by autonomy of the gen-
erations, giving rise to a later departure of young peo-
ple from the parental home (Galland, 1997). These
trends apply to all modern societies, as research un-
dertaken in different European countries (Gullestad &
Segalen, 1997) and the United States clearly shows.
In analyzing these structural changes, Riley and
Riley (1993) foresee the emergence of a new kinship
form, a "latent matrix of relationships?" This new
form is characterized by less pronounced cleavages
between ages and generations. "Instead, the bound-
aries of kin networks have widened to encompass
many diverse relationships, including several degrees
of step-kin and in-laws, and also adopted and other
surrogate `relatives' chosen from outside the family"
(Riley & Riley, 1996, p. 259).
In this contribution, I will examine the process of
age integration in the context of a more classic kin-
ship structure, that of the "expanded" three-genera-
tional family type of kinship. This analysis relies upon
original research of intergenerational solidarity be-
tween three generations of the same family. This re-
search began in 1992 with a survey of families,
which included at least three adult members of differ-
ent generations not living in the same household. The
anchor for this survey was a "pivotal" generation per-
son, born between 1939 and 1943, who had at least
one adult child and one parent alive (not living nec-
essarily in the same household). This methodology
allowed the same comprehensive set of questions to
be put to a pivotal generation member and to his/her
parent and adult child (Attias-Donfut, 1995).
Each of the three generations in this research repre-
sents a relatively homogenous age grouping, clearly dif-
ferentiated in respect to historical background and cur-
rent stage of the life course. Young people have entered
the world of work (jobs for some, further education for
others); most of the pivotal generation are active in the
labor force, and members of the eldest generation have
been in retirement for some time and are at risk of expe-
riencing disability. Because these family generations are
at the same time "historical" and "welfare" generations
(cohorts), they are particularly suited to an analysis of
the interface between private and public spheres, and
of social change interacting with family relations.
Empirical results demonstrate the importance of fi-
nancial gifts made by the pivotal and older genera-
tions. Analyzing responses from three generations of
the same family makes possible a more precise mea-
surement of different forms of support. The data show
that 33% of the grandparents (the older generation)
give money to their adult children, and 30% give
money to their grandchildren (the younger genera-
tion). In total, almost one in two older people (49%)
give money to either their adult children or grand-
children. As far as the pivotal generation is con-
cerned, 64% of the households provide financial help
271
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
to their children, and 9% give financial help to their
parents. In contrast to these downward financial trans-
fers, services are widely exchanged between genera-
tions, both downward and upward. For example, 89%
of pivots provide at least one domestic service to their
parents, and 49% of the older generation members offer
time assistance to their children (Attias-Donfut, 1995).
Home sharing is another way to redistribute resources.
In addition to financial transfers, individuals can also
provide support by having either their children or their
parents live with them. Home sharing sometimes ex-
presses the desire of both generations to live in the same
household (where there are close ties and good rela-
tionships). But this pattern has become less frequent as
the norm for "intimacy at a distance" has prevailed
(Rosenmayr & Kockeis, 1963). Because home sharing
occurs at the expense of privacy of both coresident gen-
erations, it seems to most often be a result of economic
necessity. Economic links across generations through
help with housing is highly important, because this type
of support can be of great benefit to poorer households
who can not afford to redistribute money.
Private transfers, whether financial or in kind, as
well as shared living arrangements, result in an overall
reduction of intergenerational inequalities because the
different kinds of support are mainly given to needy
family members. Private transfers have redistributive
effects and therefore contribute to reduce inequalities
that are age-related (Attias-Donfut & Wolff, 2000).
In the area of lifestyles and values, there is also a
reduction of generational differences through social
and cultural exchanges within families, as shown by
the following results from the three-generational study.
From one generation to another, as can be expected,
we observe marked differences in values and behav-
ior. As we move from the oldest to the youngest gener-
ation, relations between couples become more egali-
tarian, there is a more equitable division of household
tasks, the practice of religion diminishes, and educa-
tion patterns are less authoritarian. These examples,
among others, confirm well-known trends. Compar-
ing answers of different generations in the same fam-
ily reveals a strong intergenerational transmission of
behavior and values. Modern attitudes are transmit-
ted, but so also (to a much lesser degree) are tradi-
tional attitudes. Because changes across generations
only occur for some linages, we can identify through
whom and by what means changes are introduced.
Among the complexity of factors and influences at
play, one factor appears especially significant: the in-
fluence of intergenerational social mobility. A change
in behavior from one generation to the next is more
marked in families where there is ascending social
mobility. This phenomenon is certainly not limited to
the domain of education, but also can be found using
other indicators of social mobility. A change in social
status facilitates or brings about the adoption of new
values and new behavior. This shows how the capac-
ity of societies to change and the speed of this change
are linked to the degree of openness of social classes.
Another phenomenon has to be taken into account:
the influence of children upon their parents, or "re-
versed socialization" (Allerbeck, Jennings, & Rosen-
mayr, 1979). This takes place today all the more so be-
cause the colongevity of generations prolongs the
length of time in which exchanges and influences take
place, and increases proximity between generations.
The age difference between parents and children sym-
bolically contracts when the life span increases.
We are especially interested here in the diffusion of
social change from the youngest adults to the oldest,
and the factors associated with these influences. Social
mobility does not only benefit those who climb the so-
cial ladder, but also their parents. Several mechanisms
can be seen to be at work. Social mobility is often the
result of parental investment, which implies an initial
good relationship between parents and children. The
upward mobility of children increases the distance
from their parents, not only in relation to standards of
living but also in lifestyles and outlook upon the world
(Gaulejac, 1987). From this process, two scenarios can
be drawn. There is either a weakening of the genera-
tional ties or, on the contrary, the debt toward their
parents is strongly felt and children repay it by sharing
the gains of their upward social mobility. They are
able to do so through economic help. But they can
also exert a cultural influence upon their parents, lead-
ing them to change their values and behavior. This can
be brought about by the prestige that accompanies the
children's elevated social position and the pride that
this inspires in the parents.
The results of our research support these hypotheses.
The "rebound" effects of upward social mobility by
children to their parents can be clearly seen for the
most part in a rise in the standard of living and social
capital of the latter. In order to examine the effect of
this upon value systems and behavior, the pivotal gen-
eration was asked to identify domains in which their
children had influenced them. A minority of parents re-
ported a strong influence was exerted upon them in the
area of fundamental issues such as religion, politics, so-
cial problems, or education. This group of parents had
children who experienced a higher degree of social
mobility than the average. Among them, mothers are
overrepresented. Among other parents, a majority re-
ported some form of influence, although it was weaker
than for the former group of parents and more linked to
such formal aspects of lifestyle as dress appearance,
house decoration, food, leisure activities, and style of
education. Mothers in this category are again more re-
ceptive than fathers to their children's influence
(women appear as the main actors of social change).
Social mobility is certainly not the only factor af-
fecting ascending transfers, even though its influence
is important. Affective proximity and the quality of
relationships facilitate these reciprocal transmissions.
The confrontation between generations that have dif-
ferent values creates zones of influence in family life.
New ideas are tested and there is a move toward
their relative acceptance. This confrontation medi-
ates change. Thus, the changes introduced by the
young slowly win over the other generations and ex-
tend outward socially through the mediation of the
family.
272 The Gerontologist
The increase in life expectancy and its effect of
prolonging the duration of exchanges between the
generations brings about the increasing probability of
reciprocal influences between the generations. The
new models of relations that are more egalitarian al-
low these exchanges of influences to occur. In this
way, the different types of exchange between the
generations, whether they be economic or cultural, can
contribute to a reduction (without actually eradicating)
the differences between the generations, thereby adding
to the process of age integration in society.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Dr. Claudine Attias-Donfut, Directeur des
recherches sur le vieillissement, 49 rue Mirabeau, 75016 Paris, France.
E-mail: claudine.attias-donfut@cnav.fr
References
Allerbeck, K. R., Jennings, K. M., & Rosenmayr, L. (1979). Generations and
families. In S. H. Barnes, & M. Kaase (Eds.), Political action (pp. 487­
522). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Attias-Donfut, C., & Wolff, F. C. (2000). The redistributive effects of gener-
ational transfers. In S. Arber & C. Attias-Donfut (Eds.), The myth of
generational conflict. The family and state in ageing societies (pp. 22­
46). London: Routledge.
Attias-Donfut, C. (Ed.). (1995). Les solidaritiés entre générations: Vieillesse,
Familles, Etat. Paris: Nathan.
Attias-Donfut, C., Segalen, M. (1998) Grands-Parents. La famille à travers
les générations, Paris, Odile Jacob.
de Singly, F. (1990). Le soir, le couple et la famille [The self, the couple
and the family]. Paris: Nathan.
Durkheim, E. (1975). Cours de sociologie de la famille: la famille conju-
gale [Introduction to family sociology: The conjugal family]. In E.
Durkheim (Ed.), Textes III Paris: Minuit. (original work published in
1892).
Galland, O. (1997). Sociologie de la jeunesse (2nd. ed.) Paris: Armand Colin.
Gaulejac, V. (1987). La névrose de classe: trajectoire sociale et conflits
d'identité. Paris: Hommes et groupes.
Gullestad, M., & Segalen, M. (1997). Family and kinship in Europe. Lon-
don: Pinter.
Rosenmayr, L., & Kockeis, E. (1963). Essai d'une théorie sociologique de la
vieillesse et de la famille. Revue Internationale des Sciences Sociales,
3, 423­448.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W., Jr. (1993). Connections: Kin and cohort. In V.
Bengtson, & A. Achenbaum (Eds.), The changing contract across gener-
ations (pp. 169­189). New York: DeGruyter.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W., Jr. (1996). Generational relations: A future
perspective. In T. K. Hareven (Ed.), Ageing and generational relations
over the life course (pp. 283­291). New York: Aldine DeGruyter.
Thery, I. (1996). L'Homme désaffilié. Esprit, 227, December.
Age Integration or Age Conflict as Society Ages?
Anne Foner, PhD
Department of Sociology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
A major concern about population aging--the in-
crease in the numbers, proportions, and capacities of
older people in the society--is that it will produce
conflicts between working-age and older people. For
example, in a widely quoted article, the economist
Lester Thurow (1996) asserted that "in the years
ahead, class warfare is apt to be redefined as the
young against the old, rather than the poor against
the rich." Why? Because, he argues, the increasing
size of the older population will cause an explosion
in public pension costs and health-care spending for
older people. Yet, while the political influence of the
elderly population will assure the maintenance of
old age entitlements, it is not the old who will bear
the major burden of paying for them. Rather, accord-
ing to Thurow, financing the rising costs of pro-
grams benefiting the old will come at the expense
of nonelderly people, who tend to be less affluent
than their elders. Under this scenario of age conflict,
there could well be obstacles to age integration as
the working-age population resists opening up im-
portant social roles to their elders and shuns cross-
age interactions.
In this essay I argue that although age conflicts, if
they were to emerge, could counteract trends toward
age integration, there is an opposite outcome: that
age integration will offset tendencies to age conflicts.
In fact, past history supports such an eventuality.
Predictions of age-based conflict are not new. For
years we have been warned about coming age wars
as the working-age population rebels against the di-
rect and indirect burdens of supporting public pro-
grams favoring older people, but yielding few clear
benefits to younger adults. However, despite these
dire predictions, young and the middle-aged adults
have not risen up against the old or against policies
that benefit the old. Indeed, there has been, and still
is, widespread support among all age strata for keep-
ing the Social Security program in the United States
healthy and making sure that older people get ade-
quate medical care (e.g., Bengtson & Harootyan,
1994; Cook, Marshall, Marshall, & Kaufman, 1994).
In short, the expected "age wars" have not
erupted. The working-age population has not chal-
lenged public policies that favor older people, poli-
cies that appear to operate against the self-interests of
young and middle-aged adults. This, despite the in-
crease in the numbers of old people, particularly old-
old people (aged 85+). Alternatively, there are signs
of increasing age integration as age barriers to social
roles are loosening (Riley & Riley, 1994). How can
we account for this apparent anomaly?
273
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
Forestalling Age Wars
Two basic points have been put forward to ac-
count for people of working age favoring programs
that support old people: (1) Young and middle-aged
adults have a stake in protecting public programs for
older adults because these programs relieve them of
financial responsibility for elders in their own fami-
lies. (2) Younger adults want to protect these pro-
grams for their own later years. Thus, there is some-
thing in old-age programs for both old and young.
These arguments are fairly straightforward--indeed
have been incorporated into public discussions. In
addition to considering these points, I will discuss
several related conceptual themes and explore more
fully the complexity of the underlying issues.
The Nature of Age Systems in Society.--As described
elsewhere (Foner, A., 1974,1984,1995), the mecha-
nisms noted above for offsetting age conflicts are re-
lated to essential characteristics of age structuring in
society.
First, fundamental microlevel social structures to
which people are attached, such as the family, are
age heterogeneous. They fit the age-integrated model.
In these structures people of different ages are linked
together, interact, and forge intergenerational bonds.
The significance of such heterogeneity is highlighted
by a contrast with the class situation. Microlevel so-
cial structures--again, the family being a prominent
example--are typically class homogeneous. These
class-homogeneous structures provide a solid basis
for class identity and allegiance and serve to insulate
members from intimate contact with people from
other classes. In short, they promote solidarity within
classes, but not necessarily bonds across class lines.
Second, the inevitability of aging encourages
young and middle-aged adults to look to the future
and to concern themselves with their status when
they themselves will become old. Hence, people of
working age may support publicly maintained old-
age pension systems and other publicly subsidized
programs for the old because they stand to benefit
from them in their later years.
These two features of age structuring help to explain
why potential age conflicts have not materialized. But,
in addition, other more complex issues are involved.
What Do We Mean by Age Conflicts?--The terms
"age wars" or "generation wars" typically refer to so-
cietal-wide cleavages between young and old--not
to disagreements between young and old that crop
up in structures within the society: the family, the
workplace, or community organizations. The situa-
tion in the 1960s and early 1970s may be a paradig-
matic case. Then, the issues confronting society--
questions of ideals and morality-- were not diffused
by mechanisms that operate to avert age conflicts. At
that time, many young people were concerned about
such moral questions as just and unjust wars and the
rights of all people, not just the young. These were is-
sues that the young (typically those at college age)
perceived required immediate resolution and could
not be put off in the hope of possible future improve-
ment. Rather than finding common ground with
older adults, they tended to see older adults as obsta-
cles to forging a peaceful and just society. As young
people called into question both foreign policy and
domestic policy regarding equal rights, they pro-
claimed that basic changes were needed in the soci-
ety, precisely the kinds of changes that dismayed ma-
ture and older adults. And the young activists went on
marches, held mass rallies, organized sit-ins, and en-
gaged in civil disobedience to promote their causes.
In light of these past age conflicts, the term "age
wars" may seem overdrawn as a description of age
relations in society today, or even what has been pre-
dicted for the future--barring any resurgence of the
"all or nothing" issues that aroused many young peo-
ple in the 1960s. In the 1980s and 1990s, whenever
disagreements among age strata emerged, they typi-
cally involved age-related economic policies and
hardly constituted a form of warfare. Rather, they
have been of the same order as many economic is-
sues that come before political bodies and around
which compromises are crafted.
Age Inequalities as a Basis of Age Conflicts.--It is
the apparent unequal costs and benefits of public
programs for the old borne by younger working
adults that some expect to trigger age conflicts in the
society. We know, however, that social inequalities
often do not lead to conflicts between the advan-
taged and the disadvantaged. One reason is that ine-
qualities are legitimated.
Consider publicly supported benefits for retired
workers. These benefits are legitimated on the basis
of their past contributions. Opinion polls indicate, for
example, that there is widespread agreement among
the public that old people have paid their dues, paid
their taxes, and they are owed. In other words, they
are deserving of public support.
In the case of age inequalities, another mechanism
may also be operating. Some aspects of age inequali-
ties are not easily observable because they are con-
structed by macrolevel institutions. For example,
congressional and executive branch budget decisions
in the United States have produced federal expendi-
tures for older adults that are greater than outlays for
children. According to some commentators (e.g.,
Thurow, 1996), these expenditures on the elderly
population are squeezing government investments
in infrastructure, education, and research develop-
ment. Although such disparities in spending differen-
tially affect the young, middle-aged and old popu-
lations, it is an open question whether people of
different ages perceive these policies as representing
well-defined age inequalities and how much attention
they pay to developments in these national policies.
Given the legitimization of public health benefits
favoring the elderly population and the obscuring of
some mechanisms leading to age inequalities at the
societal level, the motivation of the young and the
middle-aged to challenge the old and policies favor-
274 The Gerontologist
ing the old is likely to be attenuated. Such a situation
provides a favorable environment for increasing age
integration.
The Macro/Micro Connection
An underlying assumption of predictions of age
conflicts is that public policies concerning the elderly
population involve an inherent conflict of interest be-
tween young and old. This notion of inherent con-
flicts of interest between groups can be found in early
writers. Marx, for one, argued concerning class that
capitalist profits derive from exploitation of workers,
and thus improvements for workers could come only
at the expense of profits for capitalists. In a somewhat
similar vein concerning age, Thurow (1996) speaks of
"making parent rich at the cost of making children
poor," a zero/sum situation where benefits for one age
category come at the expense of another age category.
I argue to the contrary. There is a connection be-
tween macrolevel and microlevel social structures
that serves to avert age conflicts. Thus, while entitle-
ments for older adults are financed and dispensed at
the macrolevel, a different process is at work in the
age-integrated family at the microlevel. At the mi-
crolevel, there are intrafamily exchanges that often
result in a circulation of benefits from older to younger
family members. The relative financial security afforded
the old by public programs permits them to contrib-
ute to their offspring and grandchildren. Thus, rather
than parents becoming rich at the expense of the
young, the young benefit both directly and indirectly
from public funds received by older adults.
The contributions that parents make to offspring
take several forms. There are outright gifts and loans.
Unlike some images of the old as recipients of aid
from children, reports from national surveys indicate
that elders give more than they receive (Bengtson &
Harootyan, 1994; Spreitzer, Schoeni, & Rao, 1996).
One study found that almost half of parents with
adult children (parents both under and over age 65)
report having given their children large sums of money
at some time. The average value of these gifts was
$5,000; among parents who were 65 and over, the
average value was $8,000 (Bengtson & Harootyan,
1994).
Bequests constitute another form of contribution
from older family members. Rossi and Rossi (1990)
found in their Boston area sample that one half of the
respondents either are or were beneficiaries of their
parents' estates, and about 14% of their grandpar-
ents' estates. Over two thirds were beneficiaries in
their parents' insurance policies.
It is not only in the United States that such patterns
of giving are found. Attias-Donfut (1995) reports sim-
ilar processes in France. She shows that money circu-
lates from the old (average age 77, ranging from 66­
92 in her national sample) to the middle generation
(average age 51, ranging from 49­53) and sometimes
skipping a generation, going directly to the young
(average age 28, ranging from 19­36). As in the
United States, such gifts and loans made by the old
within families are facilitated by public pensions and
other benefits that elders receive.
To be sure, there are differences among families in
intergenerational help patterns. For example, in the
United States, members of White households were
more likely than those in Black and Hispanic house-
holds to report having given a gift or loan of over
$200 to family members outside their households
(Spreitzer et al., 1996). However, other families may
be more likely to provide assistance across genera-
tions within the household. For example, Black chil-
dren are more likely than White children to have
lived with a grandparent some time before they were
age 18 (Szinovacz, 1996). Clearly, these grandpar-
ents were providing intergenerational material sup-
port in the form of food and shelter.
In some poor communities, pensions to the older
residents play a related role. Nancy Foner (1984)
notes that in some poor Native American communi-
ties, where families are hard pressed for cash, old age
pensioners provide a steady income source for house-
holds. Sometimes this income is even the mainstay of
the domestic economy.
Quite apart from direct financial help from older
family members, pension payments to older people
may help younger family members indirectly. Not
having to provide financial support for older people
in the family means that more funds are available for
spending on children (Bengtson & Harootyan, 1994).
In sum, I suggest that redistribution from young to
old at the societal level is transformed into redistribu-
tion from old to young at the family level through
gifts, loans, and ultimately inheritance provided by
the older family members. Rather than an inherent
conflict of interest between the old and the young,
there are mutual interests among the several genera-
tions within the age-integrated family. And these mu-
tual interests have macrolevel consequences as they
help shore up, rather than undermine, public support
for old age entitlements (but see Bengtson & Ha-
rootyan, 1994, for a somewhat different interpretation).
The Role of the Family.--The foregoing discussion
speaks of the relevance for societal level policies of
family structures and relations within the family. The
emphasis has been on commonalities in material in-
terests between young and old family members. But
the age integration of the family is not merely a mat-
ter of mutual economic interests. Family members
are linked by affective ties as well, and these too
have implications beyond the family.
We know that it is family members who provide
most of the care for older people who are dependent.
We know also that older people and younger family
members are in frequent contact with each other.
This is not to say that interactions among family
members always run smoothly. Often there are long-
standing dissatisfactions, lifestyle differences, and di-
vergent beliefs that divide young and old in the fam-
ily. But in the crunch, family members typically
come through to help and support other family mem-
bers when there are personal crises. In Matilda Ri-
275
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
ley's terms (1983), the "latent matrix" of kin relation-
ships is activated. There can be ups and downs in kin
relationships, but in the end it tends to be family
members who aid their kin in times of need.
Regarding the broad implications of such family
solidarity, I would argue that just as family members
pull together when there are family crises, having to
cope with such family problems carries over to sup-
portive attitudes about societal level policies benefit-
ing the old. It is not only such pooled efforts to deal
with family problems that contribute to intergenera-
tional cohesion; family members generally have built
bonds to each other over many years. These ties help
counteract any tendencies among younger family
members to work for or support societal policies that
might hurt the older members.
In short, age relationships within the family and
kin network are multifaceted. With its strong material
and affective base, the family has an impact not only
on individuals and relations within the family, but in-
fluences the way family members view public issues
related to age.
The Intersection of Age and Class
While there has been relatively little dissension
among age strata over entitlements for the old in the
United States, there have been consistent class-based
disagreements about these programs. In the 1980s,
for example, such groups as the National Association
of Manufacturers and the U.S. Chamber of Com-
merce favored restraining the growth of Social Secu-
rity, whereas labor unions were part of a coalition to
"save" the program (Foner, A., 1984). Nationwide
surveys from the early 1980s to the early 1990s
found that the well-off population was least likely to
view the existing system favorably (Bengtson & Ha-
rootyan, 1994; Harris, 1981).
In my view, focusing on the threat of age conflicts
masks underlying class differences and class interests
concerning age-related public programs. On the one
hand, entitlement programs for the old have strong
support in the middle class and the working class.
On the other hand, profit-making organizations and
high-income classes see potential tax and other hoped-
for financial benefits in curtailing Social Security and
other social welfare programs for the old. But efforts to
justify curtailing Social Security are never made ex-
plicitly in terms of these narrow economic interests.
Rather, the rationale is stated in seemingly more pub-
lic-spirited terms--in the name of "our children's fu-
ture."
So far, class forces working for basic restructuring of
public programs for the older population have not pre-
vailed. One might argue that these forces have been
eclipsed by a united front among people of all ages to
support the preservation of these programs, particu-
larly in middle-income and working-class groups.
While the presumably persuasive slogan, "Save our
children," may have resonance across age groups and
across classes, weakening Social Security does not ap-
pear to be a generally acceptable option as a way to
safeguard the future of today's children.
But the past is not necessarily an adequate barom-
eter of the future. The problems of an aging society
might become serious enough to drive a wedge
throughout the society between young and old. In
such an eventuality, the relationship between social
divisions based on age and those based on class, as
these bear on age-related policies, could change. If
age conflicts over these issues were to erupt, these
age cleavages could strengthen class forces in favor
of curtailing public entitlements for the older popula-
tion. The preceding analysis, however, suggests an
opposite interpretation. Despite the undoubted prob-
lems to come as we confront an aging society, age
conflict over societal resources is just one possible
outcome.
Concluding Thoughts
Those who predict increasing age conflict seem to
assume that this is the only way in which social pro-
grams benefiting older people can be altered to fit
their changed and extended lives (see Riley, Kahn, &
Foner, 1994, for a general discussion of structural lag
or a mismatch between structures and lives and the
resulting pressures for structural change). But this im-
plicitly assumes that there will be a rebellion among
the working-age population against social welfare
structures for the old (and thus indirectly against the
old themselves). Throughout this essay I have sug-
gested that there are social forces related to age in so-
ciety that operate to stave off age conflicts. Among
the factors that have helped to ward off age conflict
over public programs benefiting older people, I have
emphasized two integrative mechanisms: (1) the mu-
tual economic interests in these programs of family
members of all ages, and (2) affective intergenera-
tional bonds that unite families around the needs of
all the members. And I have argued that these mi-
crolevel phenomena have affected macrolevel poli-
cies. These same mechanisms may continue to func-
tion in the future as the number of old people
continues to mount. It is possible that strong intergen-
erational bonds within the family will be extended to
other social structures and to the society as a whole
to work for solutions to the broader societal problems
we face and to preserve viable components of present
programs.
Finally, on a broader, theoretical level, let me sug-
gest one answer to the question implicit in the title of
this essay: What is the linkage between age conflict
and age integration? As I have argued, societal-wide
age conflicts can be muted by a number of mecha-
nisms, even as the number of old people rises. To the
extent that age conflicts are dampened, conditions
are favorable for increased age integration in the so-
ciety. If age integration proceeds further, it is possi-
ble, of course, that there will be age-related flare-ups
in particular institutions. But, as age barriers to a
wide range of social roles are loosened, as people of
all ages mingle and develop common interests at the
workplace, in community organizations, and in schools
and colleges, it will be difficult to mount broad age
conflicts in the society.
276 The Gerontologist
Acknowledgments
Dr. Foner is now retired from Rutgers University.
Address correspondence to Dr. Anne Foner, 200 West 86th Street 9J,
New York, NY 10024. E-mail: foneram@aol.com
References
Attias-Donfut, C. (1995). Le double circuit des transmission. In C. Attias-
Donfut with A. Rozenkier (Eds.), Les solidarities entre generations: Vieil-
ess, families, Etat. (pp. 41­81) [Solidarities between generations: Old
age, families, State] Paris: Nathan.
Bengtson, V. L., Harootyan, R. A., & Contributors. (1994). Intergenera-
tional linkages: Hidden connections in American society. New York:
Springer.
Cook, F. L., Marshall, V. W., Marshall, J. G., & Kaufman, J. E. (1994). The
salience of intergenerational equity in Canada and the United States. In
T. M. Marmor, T. M. Smeeding, & V. L. Greene (Eds.), Economic secu-
rity and intergenerational justice: A look at North America. (pp. 91­
129). Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Foner, A. (1974). Age stratification and age conflict in political life. Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 39, 187­196.
Foner, A. (1984). The issues of age conflict in political life. In V. Ho-
molova, E. M. Hoerning, & D. Schaeffer (Eds.), Intergenerational
relationships. (pp. 170­175). New York: C. J. Hogrefe.
Foner, A. (1995). Age conflicts. In G. L. Maddox (Ed.), The encyclopedia of
aging (2nd ed., pp. 32­33). New York: Springer.
Foner, N. (1984). Ages in conflict: A cross-cultural perspective on inequal-
ity between young and old. New York: Columbia University Press.
Harris, L. (1981). Aging in the eighties: America in transition. Washington,
DC: National Council on Aging.
Riley, M. W. (1983). The family in an aging society: A matrix of latent rela-
tionships. Journal of Family Issues, 4, 439­454.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J., Jr. (1994). Age integration and the lives of older
people. The Gerontologist, 34, 110­115.
Riley, M. W., Kahn, R. L., & Foner, A. (Eds.). (1994). Age and structural lag:
Society's failure to provide meaningful opportunities in work, family,
and leisure. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Rossi, A. S., & Rossi, P. H. (1990). Of human bonding: parent-child rela-
tions across the life course. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Spreitzer, E., Schoeni, R., & Rao, K. V. (1996). Tracing intergenerational re-
lations through reports of transfers of time and money: A comparative
study of African-Americans, Hispanics, and Whites. International Jour-
nal of Sociology and Social Policy, 16, 11­34.
Szinovacz, M. (1996). Living with grandparents: Variations by cohort,
race, and family structure. International Journal of Sociology and So-
cial Policy, 16, 89­123.
Thurow, L. C. (1996, May 19). The birth of a revolutionary class. The New
York Times Magazine, pp. 46­47.
Integration of Old and Young
Peter Uhlenberg, PhD
Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
The ratio of children to old people in the popula-
tion has changed dramatically over the 20th century.
In 1900 the ratio of children under age 18 to adults
over age 65 was 10:1; by the end of the century the
ratio was 2:1. Around 2030, when baby boom co-
horts have entered old age, it is expected that the
number of children will about equal the number of
old people (a ratio of 1.2:1). This convergence of the
size of the two most disparate age groups in the pop-
ulation greatly increases the potential volume of con-
tact that children have with old people as they age
from birth to adulthood. If the social structures that
connect old people and children did not change over
the century, we would expect the amount of time
that individuals spend during childhood interacting
with old people to increase many-fold.
Unfortunately, we know almost nothing about ac-
tual changes over time in the involvement of children
with older persons. Information that would permit
even rough estimates of the volume of interaction is
available neither for the beginning nor the end of this
century. It is not surprising that no one collected sur-
vey data on relationships between young and old per-
sons in 1900. It is more surprising, however, that none
of the large surveys of older persons conducted in re-
cent years has asked questions related to the involve-
ment that they have with children. Extensive statistics
are now available on sources of income and health
status of the elderly population, but not on their rela-
tionship with young people. Despite a paucity of rele-
vant data, these are reasons why the integration of old
and young in America is a topic worth exploring.
A Case for Integration of Young and Old
It is not difficult to make a case for why this would
be a good time to investigate linkages between old
and young people in society and to examine the fac-
tors that encourage or discourage connections be-
tween them. Most simply, there are significant bene-
fits to old and young that might come from greater
age integration, and there are social policies that
might facilitate increased integration.
First, changes in both childhood and old age have
created an unprecedented opportunity for old people
to meet the needs of children. In general, children
depend upon adults for care, training, supervision,
and transfer of material resources. There is general
agreement that children do better when they receive
large amounts of these things, but changes in Ameri-
can families in recent decades have reduced the abil-
ity of parents to provide them for their children. High
rates of out-of-wedlock childbearing and divorce mean
that many children live with only one parent. By
1995, over 30% of all children (and 67% of Black
children) were living in households without two par-
277
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
ents present, and more than half are expected to live
at least part of their childhood with a single parent.
The availability of parents to provide care and super-
vision of children has been further reduced in recent
decades as an increasing proportion of mothers have
entered the labor force. In 1995, over 60% of moth-
ers with children under age 6 were working outside
the home. In short, the well-being of children de-
pends more than ever upon adults other than parents
being engaged with children.
Several changes in the older population in recent
decades have increased the potential of this age
group to make productive contributions in the area of
child care, supervision, and training. As retirement
has become more commonplace, few older persons
have significant time obligations to paid work (only
12% of those over age 65 are involved in the labor
force). This retired population tends to be healthy
(70% of those over 65 rate their health as "good" or
"excellent" and only 20% have serious functional
limitations) and economically secure (60% have in-
comes at least 200% above the poverty level). Fur-
thermore, a majority of those over age 65 have at
least a high school education and have acquired valu-
able skills over their lifetime. Without minimizing the
diversity within the older population and the serious
limitations that restrict the ability of some older per-
sons to engage in demanding activities, it seems obvi-
ous that large resources for meeting the needs of chil-
dren reside in the population of older persons.
A second benefit of integrating older and younger
persons involves the potential for children to meet the
needs of older persons. To be sure, many adults, old and
young, will be involved in meeting the needs of the
growing number of elders in the population. But there
also are special opportunities for young people to be in-
volved in this task. Young people and children have
skills and energy that could be channeled toward help-
ing old people. For example, children growing up in the
information age could assist in educating old people
about using computer and communication technology.
Even more important, perhaps, would be the gains to
children of being involved in meeting the needs of oth-
ers. A growing number of educators recognize that com-
munity service plays an important role in training for cit-
izenship. Service to older persons could be one of the
most meaningful ways of teaching children that they can
be productive and useful members of the community.
A third benefit of integrating the disparate age
groups is the potential for increased mutual under-
standing that results from the interaction of young
and old. Ageist stereotypes, like other stereotypes,
are nurtured in an environment of high segregation.
Development of cross-age friendships could dissipate
the fears that children have of old people and chal-
lenge biases that old people have toward contempo-
rary children and adolescents.
Perspectives on Old-Young Relationships
Two competing perspectives on the relationship
between old and young people in contemporary so-
ciety have received a good deal of attention in recent
years. One perspective views the old (those over age
65) and young (those under age 18) as competitors
for the resources that the productive population
transfers to the dependent population. The title of
Samuel Preston's (1984) provocative article that ig-
nited the debate over intergenerational equity was
"Children and the Elderly: Divergent Paths for Amer-
ica's Dependents." If, as suggested by this title, the
old and the young are dependent upon the middle
generation, then one might assume that there is little
that they can do for each other. Indeed, they become
rivals separated not only by life stages, but also by
economic interests.
This image of the young and old separated into
categories with no significant interaction fits well
with the familiar model of age stratification that sees
life divided into three boxes. Children are involved
with education (job training), whereas the old are in
the trivial (but costly) box of leisure. Both are largely
excluded from the labor force and therefore are
viewed as unproductive and dependent. The old are
not involved in the primary task confronting the
young (getting an education), and the young can best
aid the leisure pursuits of the old by staying out of
their way. Nothing in this model suggests a connec-
tion between the old and young that leads to mean-
ingful exchanges with each other.
The other perspective on linkages between the old
and young in American society starts with the family,
rather than the economy, and focuses on relationships
between grandparents and grandchildren. In contrast to
the intergenerational equity literature, the grandparent
literature tends to see an important linkage between
older and younger persons based on affection and car-
ing arising from kinship ties. Although the literature on
grandparenthood is growing, much of the research is
based on small, nonrepresentative samples, and it tends
to avoid the most interesting questions. Thus, we know
the most about one of the least important aspects of the
relationship--frequency of contact. Knowing that most
grandparents have frequent contact with at least some
of their grandchildren is not irrelevant, but it does not
provide insight into the content and significance of
these relationships for either party. A search for rigorous
studies examining the importance of grandparents in
the lives of children, or the importance of grandchildren
in the lives of older people, is disappointing. Existing
studies indicate that the old and young may be con-
nected in significant ways through kinship bonds, but
important work remains to be done in assessing how
much older people contribute to the development of
human capital in children and how much social capital
they provide for children. Further, exploring meaningful
linkages between older and younger persons should not
begin with an exclusive focus on grandparent­grand-
child connections. Other potentially important links be-
tween older and younger persons who are not biologi-
cally related also need to be explored.
Evidence of Benefits
Although relatively little aging research has fo-
cused on consequences of integration of older and
278 The Gerontologist
younger persons, there is some evidence that it can
produce positive outcomes. One area involves exten-
sive interaction; the situation where grandparents live
in the same home (coreside) with their adolescent
grandchildren. The other area involves intergenera-
tional programs explicitly designed to bring unrelated
older and younger persons together.
Coresiding grandparents and grandchildren.--Sta-
tistics from the U.S. Bureau of the Census indicate
that, since the 1980s, both the number and propor-
tion of children living with one or more of their
grandparents have increased (Saluter, 1992). Several
studies have examined possible effects of being a
custodial grandparent on the grandparent involved
(Hayslip, Shore, Henderson, & Lambert, 1998; Jen-
dreck, 1994; Minkler & Roe, 1993). Several adverse
consequences, such as social isolation, poor health,
and depression, have been reported for these grand-
parents. A complete picture of the effects on grand-
parents is not provided in these studies, however, be-
cause little attention is given to possible benefits (such
as increased meaning in life or satisfaction of helping
children with needs). Furthermore, these studies have
not been able to examine consequences for the chil-
dren who have grandparents involved in their lives.
Using a large, nationally representative sample of
adolescents, Kirby and Uhlenberg (1998) have com-
pared outcomes for adolescents living with a grand-
parent to those not living with a grandparent). In this
study we were able to assess four aspects of adoles-
cent well-being: quality of relationship reported with
mother, involvement in delinquent activities, aca-
demic performance, and evidence of depression. In
no comparison was there evidence of a negative con-
sequence associated with grandparents coresiding
with their grandchildren. Further, in several areas
there was evidence that presence of a grandparent
had beneficial effects on adolescent well-being. First,
presence of a grandparent in single-mother families
was associated with lower rates of adolescent delin-
quent behavior. Second, in both single-mother fami-
lies and no-parent families, adolescent girls had a
lower rate of depression when a grandparent was liv-
ing in the family. Third, adolescents in families with-
out either parent present reported much higher qual-
ity relationships with their surrogate mother if the
surrogate mother was a grandparent, rather than a
foster mother.
Grandparents who engage in the demanding work
of rearing or helping to rear their grandchildren who
lack two parents no doubt experience stress (as do
parents of adolescents). However, these findings sug-
gest that this involvement tends to improve their
grandchildren's lives. Researchers interested in inter-
generational relationships need to be reminded that
relationships should be viewed from the perspective
of both generations and that relationships are multi-
faceted. A relationship that is stressful to one person
may at the same time be rewarding and beneficial for
the other persons involved in it. Additional research
needs to examine more broadly ways in which older
persons can positively affect the lives of their grand-
children.
Intergenerational programs.--One can also find
evidence of benefits of age integration in situations
not involving kinship ties. Professionals in human
service fields report rapid growth in recent years in
the number of intergenerational programs in the
United States. These programs are "designed to en-
gage non-biologically linked older and younger per-
sons in interactions that encourage cross-genera-
tional bonding, promote cultural exchange, and
provide positive support systems that help to main-
tain the well-being and security of the older and
younger generations" (Newman, Ward, Smith, Wil-
son, & McCrea, 1997, p. 56). Some of the national
programs that are included in this area are: Adopt a
Grandparent Program, which arranges for young
people to make regular visits to older persons; Foster
Grandparent Program, which matches lower income
older persons with children who have special needs;
Across Ages, which involves older volunteers as
mentors to especially vulnerable youth; and "Retired
Senior Volunteers Program, which, among other
things, places older volunteers in schools, hospitals,
and other settings where they can assist children. In
1986 the National Council on Aging, AARP, the
Child Welfare League of America, and the Children's
Defense Fund came together to create Generations
United, a national advocacy organization to promote
age integration. To the extent that these programs
have been evaluated, they have been found to bene-
fit both the older and younger persons involved in
them.
In addition to programs that are national in scope,
there are numerous local programs that match older
persons with resources to children with needs. Older
persons in these programs serve as mentors, tutors,
caregivers, nurturers, friends, and coaches. An exam-
ple of this is the Senior Citizen School Volunteer Pro-
gram, developed by Generations Together at the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh in 1978, which works with both
teachers and older volunteers to train, place, and sup-
port older persons working with children in schools.
Other programs facilitate the service of older volun-
teers and workers in day care centers and community
centers. Still other programs bring old people and
children together to work on projects that will im-
prove the community. For descriptions of a wide
range of these types of programs see Intergenera-
tional Programs: Past, Present and Future (Newman
et. al., 1997).
The proliferation of intergenerational programs sug-
gests that concern for age integration may be increas-
ing, and efforts to bring it about are developing. Nev-
ertheless, one should not exaggerate the level of
involvement of older persons in the lives of children
at this time. A recent national survey of respondents
who were able and willing to participate in tele-
phone interviews found that persons over age 65 are
only about one third as likely as persons aged 35­44
to engage in volunteer work that benefits children
279
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
and teens (16.8% vs 48.1%) (Bengtson & Harootyan,
1994). In addition, intergenerational programs are
not generally viewed as significant efforts to solve so-
cial problems or to change the structure of the life
course. Moody and Disch (1989) argue that public
support for intergenerational programs is superficial
("a mile wide and an inch deep"), and others (New-
man et. al., 1997) suggest that these programs are seen
as "cute" rather than genuinely significant. Compared
to the "big" issues of health and income (Medicare
and Social Security), intergenerational programs are a
very small item on the political agenda. Age integra-
tion may have profound implications for the quality of
life over the life course, but it is not yet generally rec-
ognized as something that merits serious attention.
Conclusion
When social institutions are structured to encour-
age segregation, the status quo may seem natural and
comfortable to many of those involved. It is quite
possible that a survey would find that a majority of
children do not want to be around old people more
than they are already, and that a majority of old peo-
ple do not desire greater contact with children. This
finding would no more justify continuing current age
segregation patterns than a survey of attitudes of
southern Whites in 1950 would have justified con-
tinuing racial segregation. It is social scientists who
should lead the way in explaining how social forces
produce age segregation and in evaluating the costs
and benefits of maintaining the status quo. Ways of
restructuring society to bring about greater age inte-
gration could be proposed. There already is clear ev-
idence that increasing age integration of older and
younger people in our society could produce benefi-
cial outcomes. Children would receive more care
and supervision from mature adults. More older peo-
ple would be engaged in socially significant activi-
ties, and young people would be an important re-
source helping to meet the needs of an aging
population.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Dr. Peter Uhlenberg, University of North
Carolina, CB#3210, Department of Sociology, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
E-mail: peter_uhlenberg@unc.edu
References
Bengtson, V. L., & Harootyan, R. (Eds.). (1994). Hidden connections: A
study of intergenerational linkages in American society. New York:
Springer.
Hayslip, B., Shore, R. J., Henderson, C. E., & Lambert, P. L. (1998.) Custo-
dial grandparenting and the impact of grandchildren with problems on
role satisfaction and role meaning. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sci-
ences, 53B, S164­S173.
Jendrick, M. P. (1994). Grandparents who parent their grandchildren: Cir-
cumstances and decisions. The Gerontologist, 34, 206­216.
Kirby, J. B. & Uhlenberg, P. (1998, April). The wellbeing of adolescents:
Do coresident grandparents make a difference? Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Chicago, IL.
Minkler, M. & Roe, K. M. (1993). Grandmothers as caregivers. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Moody, H. & Disch, R. (1989). Intergenerational programming in public
policy. In S. Newman & S. Brummel (Eds.), Intergenerational programs:
Imperatives, strategies, impacts, trends (pp. 101­110). Binghamton,
NY: Haworth Press.
Newman, S., Ward, C. R., Smith, T. B., Wilson, J. O., & McCrea, J. O.
(1997). Intergenerational programs: Past, present, and future. London:
Taylor & Francis.
Preston, S. H. (1984). Children and elderly: Divergent paths for America's
dependents. Demography, 25, 44­49.
Saluter, A. F. (1992). Marital status and living arrangements: March 1991.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, P-20: 468.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Age Integration Through Interest Mediation: Political Parties
and Unions
Martin Kohli
Institute for Sociology, Free University of Berlin, Germany.
The point of departure of this essay is the by now
well-established fact (Riley, Kahn, & Foner, 1994)
that contemporary Western societies are marked by a
massive structural lag: Their degree of age integration
is low and seems to be increasingly at odds with their
social and demographic resources. Age criteria are
still highly inflexible, and structural age barriers re-
main important. Structures such as those of educa-
tion, work, or leisure thus tend to be age homoge-
neous, that is, they do not offer individuals the
opportunity to interact with others who differ in age.
This state of affairs in Western societies is a result
of modernization; it has been produced and deep-
ened over the past two centuries by a process that I
have termed the "institutionalization of the life
course" (Kohli, 1986), and which reached its culmi-
nation in the 1960s. While there are now some indi-
cations that this process has come to a halt and has
even started to partly reverse itself, the general pat-
tern has not changed: In their basic contexts of living
outside their families, individuals are still predomi-
nantly confronted with their own age peers. If this is
280 The Gerontologist
so, how then do these societies assure their age inte-
gration? How do they achieve the level of cross-age
interaction that is necessary for their survival?
Where cross-age interaction in the structures of ev-
eryday life is deficient, it needs to be institutionalized
in other domains. In this essay, I discuss cross-age in-
teraction in the domain of interest mediation. This
concerns, on the one hand, the political system in its
more narrow sense, where the interests of individual
citizens are mediated through parties and social
movements, and, on the other hand, the economic
system where the workers have traditionally orga-
nized their interests through unions.
For cross-age interaction in the domain of interest
mediation, there are two basic alternatives. The large
organizations of interest mediation such as parties or
unions can either be age homogeneous, that is, re-
stricted to specific age groups such as those of "work-
ing age," or age encompassing. In the first case, inter-
est mediation among age groups is externalized to
the political "market"--to the conflict between orga-
nizations. The political market (e.g., competition in
elections and in parliament) is then structured along
age lines (such as between wage earners and clients
of the welfare state, or between workers and pension-
ers). In the second case, age-encompassing organiza-
tions, interest mediation among age groups is in-
ternalized, and the political market is likely to be
structured along political camps such as traditional
classes (or religions, or ethnic/linguistic cleavages).
As to political parties, it seems obvious that they
are usually age encompassing. In Germany, this is in-
deed (more or less) true for their membership. But it
is less clear for political activity and leadership (Kohli,
Neckel, & Wolf, 1999).
The nonusual cases are the "gray" parties, which
orient themselves exclusively to the interests of the
elderly population (e.g., toward improving public
pensions). There are two countries--The Netherlands
and the Czech Republic--where "gray" parties have
at times succeeded in capturing some seats in the na-
tional parliament. In Germany, the Grays have dur-
ing a few years formed an election alliance with the
Greens, which has allowed them to send their leader
into the Federal parliament even though their share
of votes remained much below the required quorum
of 5%. But, similar to other one-issue parties, gray
parties have been vulnerable to the political ups and
downs of their issue--or to the appropriation of their
issue by the larger parties--and therefore have not
been able to attract a stable proportion of voters. In
Germany, as in other countries, they have for the
time being slipped back into insignificance.
With the larger parties, membership is indeed
spread out over the whole adult life span. But the dis-
tribution is far from even: The parties are much stron-
ger among the elderly population than the young.
Thus, among the Social Democrats (SPD), 30% of the
members (in 1995) were above age 60, and only 6%
below 30. For the Christian Democrats (CDU/CSU),
the figures were 33% and 5%, respectively. The first
rank is taken by the East German ex-Communists
(PDS), where the share of the elderly members is
40%. And even the Greens--who "in the interest of
data protection" refuse to publish data on the social
composition of their members--seem to face a situa-
tion where their core cohorts are advancing along the
age spectrum.
The parties are aging rapidly, and of course they
see this as a very mixed blessing. They have been
successful in retaining their elderly members in the
organization, and the old have remained an impor-
tant organizational resource for them. But they have
had much less success in integrating the young peo-
ple. This creates a difficult organizational dilemma.
On the one hand, the elderly members are increas-
ingly asking for more than passive membership--
they want to participate actively and to be heard.
They are still less influenced by individualization,
and thus less prone to political volatility, but even
they are no longer the rock-sure lifelong members. In
the back lurks the threat to the parties of losing the
elderly members and voters to those who offer them
more--for example, the Grays. On the other hand,
this is likely to turn off the young people even more.
The parties try to cope with this dilemma by creating
special suborganizations for their elderly members
that engage them as activists and help to mobilize the
elderly voters--who with their growing population
share and higher turnout increasingly determine the
election outcomes--while at the same time limiting
their say in general party matters.
Political activity and leadership are still heavily
concentrated in the middle years of the life course.
An especially drastic indicator is the age structure of
the Federal parliament. Both the younger and the el-
derly population are underrepresented. Until the end
of the 1960s, the share of young members (up to age
35) had remained below 5%. In the election of 1972,
it doubled to 9.1%--a consequence of the rebellion
of the "68" generation. In 1990, there was again an
increase--this time as a consequence of German uni-
fication, which brought a sizable group of young
members from the East into parliament. Both "rejuve-
nations," however, were short-lived. The share of
elderly members (aged 65 and older) declined from
9.6% (elections of 1961) to 1.4 in 1976, and then in-
creased again somewhat; but with 3.3% in 1994, it
has remained considerably below the level of 1961,
and now represents only about one fifth of the popu-
lation share over age 65.
We thus find a similarly paradoxical evolution as
in employment: Political leadership is also marked
by a trend toward early retirement. It seems to be an
unwritten law that members of parliament who have
reached retirement age no longer run for reelection.
Possible reasons are external pressure as well as indi-
vidual preference. Perhaps the party leadership exerts
pressure to create vacancies for younger people. But
equally possibly, the stresses of life in politics are
high enough and the pensions generous enough to
make members quit by their own choice.
As to trade unions, it seems obvious that they are
not age encompassing--they are focused on the la-
281
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
bor force. This is indeed true for their main clientele.
But it is less clear with regard to overall membership
(Kohli, Kunemund, & Wolf, 1997).
In the German case, quite unintentionally, the
unions have become one of the largest old-age orga-
nizations. At the end of 1994, the German Trade
Union Confederation (DGB) had 1.7 million retired
members, corresponding to roughly 10% of the pop-
ulation above 60 and 13% of the pensioners. This
was less than for the population of active working
age (18­60), where membership in the DGB corre-
sponded to roughly 17% (or 30% of the employed la-
bor force). But given the usual perception of unions
as organizations of active workers, the degree of
"unionization" of retirees, and, conversely, of the
"graying" of the unions, comes as a surprise.
The dilemma here is evident, even more so than
with political parties. On the one hand, unions have
an interest in keeping their retirees as members be-
cause their strength in the collective bargaining pro-
cess depends on the number of their members--
whether active or not. Even in the case of industrial
conflict, elderly people may be of help. In strike cam-
paigns, for example, retirees are in a better position
than workers because they virtually have nothing to
lose--they cannot be fired. Moreover, the union re-
tirees are multiplicators of union politics and, as
such, a potential of great importance in recruitment.
They are useful not only in terms of a head count, or
as volunteers and supporters in the bargaining pro-
cess, but may help in gaining new members. A
unionist tradition in families or communities is hardly
imaginable where elderly retirees are crowded out of
the organization. In other words, if the unions stopped
organizing retirees, they might undermine one of
their own organizational resources.
On the other hand, with a growing proportion of
retirees, unions face the problem of goal conflicts.
Their main field must remain that of industrial con-
flict and negotiation, but they experience lower rev-
enues from membership dues that remain fixed
(given that retirees usually are charged only a frac-
tion of what applies to the active members), and ris-
ing benefits to be paid. Moreover, some of the el-
derly members (especially the former union activists)
are increasingly self-confident and desire more ac-
tive participation in union politics for their own
agenda. As do the political parties, unions try to
cope with this dilemma by creating special organi-
zational forms for their older members--to satisfy
them and enlist them in mobilizing more general
support among elders, while at the same time lim-
iting their influence on overall decision making.
There is a range of organizational options available,
all with their advantages and disadvantages, that
have been variously experimented with in different
European countries.
What are the consequences of these patterns of in-
terest mediation? Political parties as well as unions
try to remain age encompassing, and thereby to inter-
nalize interest mediation across all ages while at the
same time keeping their focus of activity and leader-
ship in the middle years. How they will solve this or-
ganizational dilemma will be crucial not only for
their own strength but also for societal age integra-
tion more generally.
For the economic well-being of elders, the results
of their being integrated into age-encompassing orga-
nizations of interest mediation seem to have been
rather positive. So far, Germany (unlike, e.g., the
United States) has not developed much in terms of
age-based organizations and lobbies for the elderly
population--not because German elders are less able
to organize but because, given the age-encompassing
policy framework, it has been less necessary for
them. The political parties and--this being a corpo-
ratist system--the unions have been quite effective in
first expanding and now maintaining a high level of
public old-age social security. Based on these results,
it would appear that the elderly population stands to
gain from taking the age-relevant issues out of the
arena of direct conflict between age-based organiza-
tions, and internalizing them into the large organiza-
tions of interest mediation themselves, thereby mak-
ing them more age encompassing.
On the level of activity and participation, the re-
sults are more mixed. It may well be that age-homo-
geneous organizations would offer elderly people
more direct opportunities for participation and self-
direction, and have a greater potential for mobiliza-
tion.
On the level of immediate cross-age interaction,
the results are again predominantly positive. In age-
encompassing organizations, elders can serve as
models and living memory of past experiences
(e.g., political or industrial conflicts), and they are in
turn confronted with change and innovations. Age-
encompassing organizations thus reinforce the daily
interaction and mutual learning among generations,
which is an important part of social cohesion; by
this, they also contribute to reasonable ways of re-
solving the generational conflicts of interests and of
cultural perspectives that typically occur in aging
societies.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Prof. Dr. Martin Kohli, Freie Universität
Berlin, Institut für Soziologie, Babelsberger Str. 14-16, D-10715 Berlin,
Germany. E-mail: kohli@zedat.fu-berlin.de
References
Kohli, M. (1986). The world we forgot: A historical review of the life
course. In V. W. Marshall (Ed.), Later life: The social psychology of
ageing, (pp. 271­303). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Kohli, M., Künemund, H., & Wolf, J. (1997). Trade unions and the elderly
population: Is retirement still linked to the sphere of work? Scandina-
vian Journal of Social Welfare, 6, 180­188.
Kohli, M., Neckel, S., & Wolf, J. (1999). Krieg der Generationen? Die poli-
tische Macht der Älteren. [War of generations? The political power of
the elderly]. In A. Niederfranke, G. Naegele, & E. Frahm (Eds.),
Funkkolleg Altern [Aging--A radio university course] (vol 2., pp. 479­
514). Opladen, Germany: Westbleutscher Verlag.
Riley, M. W., Kahn, R. L., & Foner, A. (Eds.). (1994). Age and structural lag.
Society's failure to provide meaningful opportunities in work, family,
and leisure. New York: Wiley.
282 The Gerontologist
Paradox of Opportunity: Education, Work, and Age Integration
in the United States and Germany
Dale Dannefer, PhD
Warner Graduate School of Education and Human Development, University of Rochester, New York.
For quite some time, the idea of an institutional-
ized "three-box" life course has been sharply criti-
cized for the narrow definitions of normality and
"normal aging" that it implied, and the restrictions it
seemed to place on the options and developmental
opportunities of many midlife adults (e.g., Dannefer,
1991; Riley & Riley, 1994). The norms of the single
career and the three boxes of life now seem largely
to have evaporated, but--ironically--as a result of
forces entirely unrelated to emancipatory notions
about the possibilities for successful aging and devel-
opment. The forces have been technological innova-
tion and corporate concerns about competitiveness
and profit margins, which have led to corporate
downsizing, restructuring, and the exporting of work
from advanced capitalist societies to lower-cost labor
markets. Far from utopian, the result is ". . . a concept
of `work' and `life' which might be termed `short-ter-
mism'" (Bernstein, 1996, p. 72). Perhaps predictably,
some have celebrated these changes as heralding a
new era of choice and lifestyle options (Featherstone,
1991). These changes represent, for many, a reduc-
tion in economic security in the United States and an
obfuscation of traditionally recognized mechanisms
of stratification in Europe (Furlong & Cartmel, 1997).
In the United States, the organizational disman-
tling of the "one-career life course" has left many ma-
ture, mid-career adults economically and psycholog-
ically stranded, experiencing downward mobility at a
point in their lives at which they might have hoped to
see their earnings continue to grow. Job security has
become the top issue in labor negotiations (Sleemi,
1995). But the age categories most directly hit by this
evaporation have probably been young and young
middle-aged adults. Entry-level jobs that lead to long-
term, primary sector employment are being replaced by
a growing number of low-paying, dead-end jobs that re-
sult in sporadic earnings patterns (Gittleman & Joyce,
1995). Department of Labor analyses indicate that
20% to 30% of college graduates do not find posi-
tions for which they have been trained within the first
year after graduating from college (Greenwald, 1993).
All advanced societies now confront similar tech-
nological and economic issues as they intersect with
age and the life course (Antikainen, Houtsonen,
Kauppila, & Huotelin, 1996; Taylor & Walker, 1996).
However, societies appear to vary both at the collec-
tive level--in the governmental and corporate re-
sponses to the challenges posed by these strains--
and at the individual level in the behavioral and sub-
jective responses of individual workers, who may be
increasingly impacted by them as they age. These dif-
ferences are relevant both to issues of age integration
and to structure of the life course. A consideration of
how commonly experienced forces of social change
produce contrasting responses in different societies
can be a fruitful way of understanding social dynam-
ics that are less visible under conditions of stability.
Following this strategy, this essay considers some
contrasting aspects of how the United States and Ger-
many are responding to these pressures.
In the United States, responses to these forces have
fallen heavily upon individuals. Accounts of job ero-
sion often emphasize that some such workers have
become successful entrepreneurs with relatively high
earnings. On the other hand, others have resorted to
"moonlighting"--taking a second job, working part
time, working at temporary or other marginal jobs or,
paradoxically, working more overtime. This is espe-
cially the case for midlife (age 35­54) men and
women who have heavy family responsibilities and
whose prior work experiences accustomed them to a
higher income than one or even two low-paying jobs
can support (Stinson, 1990, 1997). Some workers are
working increasingly long hours through the entire
year (Rones, Ilg, & Gardner, 1997). Full-time employ-
ees, both young and middle-aged, work more over-
time than ever; it is estimated that this growing trend
has succeeded in the elimination of 3 million jobs
with their accompanying costly benefits (Schor, 1991).
These general trends have also been felt across Eu-
rope, where the term "risk society" (Beck, 1992;
Beck, Giddens, & Lash, 1995) has come to promi-
nence. Despite these trends, the situation remains
quite different. In Germany, almost all of these indi-
vidual-level practices have been structurally blocked
because union-backed legislation kept many enter-
prises from being open evenings, weekends, or holi-
days. Compared to the United States, this will remain
true even with recent legislative changes that have
relaxed some of these restrictions. The German re-
sponse has included governmental support for job-
sharing (through providing unemployment benefits to
part-time workers) as well as more corporate-spon-
sored retraining programs. In short, the German re-
sponse has reflected more institutionalized protec-
tions in response to collectively articulated needs
and worker interests, while the U.S. response reflects
283
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
more individual-level efforts at adaptation and sur-
vival.
These behavioral contrasts obviously cannot be
understood apart from social policy and must be seen
in the context of the more general posture of work or-
ganizations, unions, and the state in relation to work-
ers. In general, European unions appear more likely
to press for skill upgrading or retraining as integral
parts of the job (Worndl, 1992), and unions them-
selves also provide some retraining. Additionally,
unions, businesses, and government jointly have sup-
ported strong government subsidies for early retire-
ment. Some German unions also have pressed ag-
gressively for further reductions in the work week
(Swenson, 1989).
In considering these contrasts, the location of
workers--both structurally and culturally--must also
be noted. As in the United States, skepticism toward
unions has been growing in Germany. Nevertheless,
German union membership (which by law must be
voluntary) has continued to run between 30% and
40%; more significantly, union-negotiated wage agree-
ments cover about 90% of workers (Markovits &
Silvia, 1992; Worndl, 1992). And one year after unifi-
cation, 50% of East German workers were recruited
into the West German unions. By contrast, union
membership has declined sharply in the United States
and has shifted into less skilled occupations. As a
mode of response to adverse change in the occupa-
tional structure, collective mobilization in the form of
union activity appears to be increasingly weak in the
United States but remains a formidable force in Ger-
many.
Comparable data on subjective orientations re-
main sketchy. Although precisely equivalent survey
questions are unavailable, there are some limited in-
dications that Germans' levels of optimism and hope-
fulness have been less adversely affected than have
Americans' by these economic challenges. In recent
years about 60% of U.S. respondents agreed with the
statement, "In spite of what some people say, the lot
of the average man is getting worse, not better." By
contrast, in 1989 more than two thirds of Germans
responded "with hope" when asked, "Is it with hope
or fears that you enter the coming year?" Moreover,
there are clear differences between the two societies
in the strength of unions and in the degree of support
for union positions and union activities (e.g., Worndl,
1992). For young people, cross-national surveys have
shown repeatedly that American youth worry more
than German youth about getting a job. Thus, al-
though individual-level economic turbulence has
been experienced in both countries, it appears that
Germans' levels of optimism and hopefulness have
been less adversely affected than have Americans'
(Glatzer, 1992; Niemi, Mueller, & Smith, 1989).
Thus, despite a shared sense of heightened risk
(Beck, 1992), significant differences exist in the way
that workers in the two societies are responding to
job erosion. These patterns of response appear to re-
flect a difference in the underlying sense of collec-
tive fate and collective responsibility. In the United
States, worker displacement was described by a re-
cent Secretary of Labor as a "secession" of those
whose skills remain useful for corporate profitability,
and who have experienced considerable prosperity;
a secession from the social contract of the larger soci-
ety (Reich, 1991). Hardly less remarkable than the
secession is the response to it of U.S. workers: That
response has entailed a sense of powerlessness, con-
fusion, fear and self-blame, and, at best, of efforts to
survive as a lone individual or family (Newman,
1993). This response, which renders the structural
forces at work largely invisible, is argued to presage
what lies ahead for other advanced capitalist societ-
ies. However, in the German case the "dynamics of
secession" are likely to be quite different, due to the
greater sense of solidarity among workers and the pri-
macy given to the rights of workers. Although Ger-
man unions engage in fewer strikes than do those of
the United States, the strikes that do occur are gener-
ally popular and effective. In the tensions follow-
ing reunification, this solidarity was dramatically re-
flected in the priority given to equalizing wage rates
between East and West (Markovits & Silvia, 1992),
a practice that clearly produced at least short-run
strains on the former West Germany.
In sum, I hypothesize that the sense of collective
well-being among age peers and between age groups
will produce differences in the structure and meaning
of age integration, and the sense of the location of
one's own life course in a convoy of others of varying
ages will produce a different construction of the life
course in these two societies. These differences will,
of course, interact with other forces, such as general
economic conditions. For example, during times of
economic contraction, the collective orientation may
provide a strong base for collective mobilization
within and across cohorts, while the individualist ori-
entation of the United States may invite intergenera-
tional conflict, (see Heclo, 1988). During periods of
rapid expansion, a collective orientation may dis-
courage entrepreneurship when it could be widely
advantageous. As noted, sweeping changes in the
calculus of individual risk could alter these trends,
one way or the other (Beck, 1992).
Two Hypotheses: Socialization vs Social Structure
Although these contrasts reflect broad and deep
differences in culture and in social practice between
the United States and Germany, it is yet possible to
identify likely mechanisms through which they are
reproduced and sustained. Two analytically distinct
types of forces can be hypothesized to be important
in their reproduction: (a) internalized differences in a
sense of collective fate and collective empowerment,
and (b) differences in the structure and culture of the
adult social networks--especially as regards the im-
portance of networks among workmates. Although
these two sources of difference are probably causally
related and may both make a significant contribu-
tion, they are analytically distinct and imply two fun-
damentally different explanatory principles: a life-
284 The Gerontologist
course socialization principle in the first case, and a
structural principle in the second.
The Socialization Hypothesis: Educational Ideology
in the United States and Germany.--One version of
the socialization hypothesis focuses on differences in
education. Schools embody the differing conceptions
of the life course assumed by the structure of the re-
spective systems. German schools have historically
been stratified into three levels (Gymnasium, Reals-
chule, and Hauptschule), oriented toward develop-
ing differentiated competencies that provide labor for
a stratified occupational structure. Although there has
been a steady trend toward increasing flexibility in
recent decades, this system has traditionally set pa-
rameters that gave individuals a limited range of oc-
cupational possibilities after their early teen years.
The apprenticeship system was a key mechanism that
structured the aspirations and expectations of youth
within those parameters, eased the transition to
adulthood (Gitter & Scheuer, 1997; Hamilton, 1990),
and helped to provide a sense of collective solidarity
and entitlement.
In the United States, education has been guided by
the "contest norm" of equal opportunity and open
competition in which those with talent can excel.
And it has been suffused with the individual hope of
upward mobility (Turner, 1960). "Rise out of your
class, not with it," is Martin Trow's inversion of Eu-
gene Debs' famous challenge, and this ideology re-
mains prominent in education. Of course, the U.S.
system is itself highly stratified in ways that serve the
needs of the existing occupational structure, its egali-
tarian pretenses notwithstanding. Thus, the crucial
difference between the two is not in stratification per
se, but in the visibility of the stratification: In the
United States, education as an agent of stratification
has been largely invisible, creating a contradiction that
has involved massive denial on the part of schools,
and confusion and unrealistic expectations for gradu-
ating students and young adults (Oakes, 1985; Rosen-
baum, 1978).
An obvious consequence of this difference for U.S.
students is a lack of realistic understanding of real
constraints on their own opportunities, which can
lead to a sense of powerlessness and self-blame
when expectations for a reasonably prosperous future
go unmet. These are, of course, precisely the terms
used to describe the response of many U.S. workers
to job displacement and downgrading. "Aim for the
stars, you can do it" is a familiar refrain of com-
mencement addresses. For many young adults, the
translation of this exhortation into past tense is, "It
was up to you, and you blew it." To the extent that
this underlying sense of lost opportunity survives in
adult consciousness, it may be the basis for contin-
ued self-blame that is carried over into adulthood
and persists throughout the life course. If such feel-
ings exist in non-college German youth, they are of-
ten ameliorated by a sense of normative appropriate-
ness and convoy-like collegiality among age peers
who are tracked together to vocational destinations.
The German counterpart features skill training and
greater job stability, resulting in a less isolated and
hence less powerless position. In this context, indi-
vidual mobility and achievement have more subdued
emphases.
The Structural Hypothesis: Mobility vs Solidarity
in Adulthood.--The social-structural hypothesis em-
bodies what is, analytically, a fundamentally different
principle. It focuses on the impact of present social
circumstances in explaining workers' attitudes and
behavior, in contrast to socialization experiences.
These circumstances include longer stints in a single
job (less job mobility), contributing to both the ex-
pectation and the reality of more enduring relations
with coworkers, (Hastings & Hastings, 1993­1994;
1994­1995), and arguably a greater sense of com-
mon fate. These factors suggest the likelihood of dif-
ferences between Germany and the United States in
the amount of social support that adults experience
from their workmates. German workers have more
enduring relationships with coworkers and share
more normative expectations of mutual support than
their American counterparts, who idealize an entre-
preneurial spirit.
The concept of the life-course convoy, defined as
a network composed of the ". . . variety of interper-
sonal relationships that become the basis for social
support . . ." over an extended span of time (Anto-
nucci, 1985, p. 97), provides a framework for analyz-
ing workplace networks. As articulated by Kahn (1979)
and by Antonucci (1985), this concept provides a
framework for characterizing support networks over
time on a number of dimensions, including the set-
tings in which convoys are situated. The convoy con-
cept has been largely associated with family and ex-
tended family relationships. The question of how well
this familistic focus is justified in cross-cultural per-
spective is one that deserves attention.
Placing the notion of "convoys of social support"
in the context of work draws attention to a broader
set of issues. As Bengtson, Mangen, and Landry
(1984) note, social support is actually a specific sub-
type of solidarity, which they term "functional" soli-
darity. The broader concept of solidarity entails affec-
tive aspects of affiliation--aspects that are tacit but
potentially quite intense--as well as the behavioral
and material interdependencies indicated by the con-
cept of social support. Solidarity has been used in the
study of families and aging (e.g., Bengtson, 1993; Jer-
rome, 1996), but has a more extensive history in the
literature on work and worker attitudes. Although it
sometimes connotes union and other forms of social
and political activism, the basic definition of solidar-
ity in the work literature entails "mutual protection,
friendship, shared meanings, and shared norms," as
well as group boundaries (Hodson et al. 1993, p.
399). Based on the potential importance of work-
place social relations sketched above, I propose that
the sociology of the life course would do well to con-
sider "convoys of solidarity" as well as "convoys of
support." (Interestingly, the existence of intergenera-
285
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
tional solidarity between workers, outside the family,
has been identified recently in the European context
[Taylor & Walker, 1996]).
At present, no comparative data are available to
address the question of whether Germans experience
more solidarity with and support from coworkers
than do U.S. workers. (It appears clear that adults in
the former East Germany do, as comparisons show
that they experience much more support from co-
workers than do West Germans [Diewald, n.d.].)
However, some recent evidence suggests that the im-
portance of support from coworkers in Germany is
underestimated even by the conventional wisdom of
German social science (Lothar, 1993). The fact that
worker solidarity has, in at least one case, been
blamed for impeding technical innovation may also
serve as an indirect indication of its strength (Buss-
kamp & Pankoke, 1990). It is difficult to imagine
such a fear in the contemporary United States.
In sum, I am hypothesizing that the structure and
ideology of education, and the structure and ideol-
ogy of workplace relations, both influence the man-
ner in which adult workers respond to the loss of
work and career: In the case of the United States,
where ideology celebrates individual mobility on the
basis of individual merit, a behavioral response of
working harder and faster is accompanied by a
subjective tendency toward self-blame. In the Ger-
man case, where ideology assumes a social contract
among workers whose educational and work experi-
ence are explicitly stratified, individuals define the
problem and appropriate responses in more social
terms, and both individual actions and social policies
reflect this emphasis.
The Norm of Egalitarianism and the Reality of
Disempowerment: The Paradox of Opportunity
These hypotheses pose a paradox. An educational
system that explicitly fosters and reproduces social
stratification (the German system) may lead to more
empowerment of its graduates than one that overtly
values an open structure of equal opportunity (the
U.S. system). If reality does not conform to the ideal,
then the foregoing account argues for giving prefer-
ence to a cultural script of how things work that fairly
accurately matches the reality. But because an inte-
gral aspect of the operation of general processes of
social legitimization is to provide casuistries that jus-
tify any strongly institutionalized state of affairs, this
preference does at the same time entail a danger of
abandoning the ideal of open opportunity.
Directly relevant to age integration, there is also
an instantiation of this paradox beyond schooling, in
adulthood. This paradox concerns the presumed op-
pressiveness of powerfully normative age-grading.
Germany is a more explicitly and formally age-
graded society than is the United States, where ideas
of age irrelevance or a "flexible life course" get a bet-
ter reception. But, if it is the case that there is a stron-
ger base of support from coworkers, and if there are
more institutionalized opportunities for education
and retraining through the middle years in Germany,
Germans may have more resources and feel more
empowered in the face of their own advancing age
(at least until age 65)--in spite of what appears to be
a less "progressive" sense of aging.
The contrasts sketched here are preliminary and
inevitably oversimplified. However, to the extent that
the general argument is credible, it advocates neither
the German nor any other particular form of educa-
tion or workplace relations. Rather, it argues for the
importance of a self-understanding that goes beyond
the distortions of ideologies whose promise has not
been and cannot be fulfilled, such as those of the
U.S. myths of open opportunity and the normality of
upward mobility. Of course, in Germany no less than
the United States, schooling has entailed a progres-
sive view of the future that always includes hope for
a better individual life. However, differences in ideal-
ized notions of the character of that life and how to
achieve it are connected to different understandings
of the importance of economic and political struc-
tures and their role in regulating opportunity.
This point returns us to the issue of structural lag,
and of the potentials of education to reinvent itself in
lifelong terms. In both societies, the exigencies of the
labor market have led to an expansion of lifelong ed-
ucation, and thereby to a loosening of conventional
roles and age norms. However, in neither society is
this a one-dimensional matter. Despite Germany's
relative emphasis on age as an exclusionary criterion,
the expectation that German institutions will invest in
retraining or field education, and innovations such as
"educational vacations" (Bildungsurlaub), provide a
set of institutional supports for constructing more
flexible life-course patterns, quite apart from those
suggested by the de-institutionalizing tendencies as-
sociated with the "risk society" (Beck, Giddance, &
Lash, 1995). In the United States, more than half of
those enrolled in higher education are "nontradi-
tional" (post-25-year-old) students, and this has been
true for more than a decade. Yet, many such students
seem to enter the system with the feeling that their age
makes them off-time "deviant cases" or "misfits." De-
spite increasingly public evidence to the contrary, the
self-perception that each is a lone ranger, embarked
on a dubious journey through terrain uncharted "by
someone my age," remains surprisingly robust.
One can imagine a different midlife conscious-
ness, were students confronted in their schooling
with a critical review of nascent cultural assumptions
regarding such things as aging and the life course,
work and mobility, and were they given the concep-
tual tools for envisioning and demanding possibilities
for the personal tailoring and intentional alteration of
the life course, and for confronting the problem of si-
multaneously realizing such tailored life courses in
the context of community life. Such a curriculum
would need to include an analytical framework that
educated workers to the possibilities and limits of in-
dividual versus collective actions. If society is to re-
dress what Riley, Kahn, and Foner (1994) correctly
identify as its failure to provide adequate life-course
286 The Gerontologist
opportunities for individuals, such a self-understand-
ing will likely be a necessary step in creating the con-
ditions in which the promise of genuine opportunity
can be more nearly realized.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Dr. Dale Dannefer, Warner Graduate School
of Education and Human Development, University of Rochester, Dewey Hall,
Rochester, NY 14627. E-mail: dane@troi.cc.rochester.edu
References
Antikainen, A., Houtsonen, J., Kauppila, J., & Huotelin, H. (1996). Living
in a learning society. Washington, DC: Falmer Press.
Antonucci, T. C. (1985). Personal characteristics, social support and social
behavior. In R. H. Binstock and E. Shanas (Eds.), Handbook of aging
and the social sciences (pp. 94­128). New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Beck, U. (1992). The risk society: Towards a new modernity. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Beck, U., Giddens, A., Lash, S. (1995). Reflexive modernization: Politics,
tradition and aesthetics in the modern social order. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford.
Bengtson, V. L. (1993). Is the contract across generations changing? Effects
of population aging on obligations and expectations across age groups.
In V. L. Bengtson & W. A. Achenbaum (Eds.), The changing contract
across generations (pp. 3­23). New York: Aldine DeGruyter.
Bengtson, V. L., Mangen, D. J., & Landry, P. H. Jr. (1984). The multigener-
ation family: Concepts and findings. In V. Garms-Homolova., E. M.
Hoerning, & C. Shaeffer (Eds.), Intergenerational relationships (pp. 63­
79). New York: C. J. Hogrefe.
Bernstein, B. (1996). Pedagogy, symbolic control and identity: Theory, re-
search, critique. London: Taylor & Francis.
Busskamp, W., & Pankoke, E. (1990). Industrielkultur und Innovationsklima
Kulturelle Altlasten und Entwicklungspotentiale im Ruhrgebeit [Indus-
trial culture and innovational climate in the conurbation perspectives of
developing the Ruhr district]. Sociologia Internationalis, 28, 133­146.
Dannefer, D. (1991). The race is to the swift. In G. M. Kenyon, J. E. Birren,
& J. J. F. Schroots (Eds.), Metaphors of aging in science and the human-
ities (pp. 155­172). New York: Springer.
Diewald, M. (n.d.). Verwandschaftsbezieghunger vor und nachder Wende
in Ostdeutchland [Interactions with relatives before and after the
change in East Germany]. Berlin: Max Planck Institute for Human De-
velopment and Education.
Featherston, M. (1991). Consumer culture and postmodernism. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.
Furlong, A., & Cartmel, F. (1997). Young people and social change. Individu-
alization and risk in late modernity. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Gitter, R. J., & Scheuer, M. (1997). U.S. and German youths: Unemploy-
ment and the transition from school to work. Monthly Labor Review,
120(3), 16­27.
Gittleman, M., & Joyce, M. (1995). Earnings mobility in the United States,
1967­91. Monthly Labor Review, 118(9), 3­13.
Glatzer, W. (1992). Orientations toward the future. In (Eds.), Recent social
trends in West Germany, 1960­1990. Montreal, Québec, Canada:
McGill-Queens University Press.
Greenwald, J. (1993). Bellboys with B.A.s. Time, 142, 36­37.
Hamilton, S. F. (1990). Work and maturity: Occupational socialization of
non-college youth in the United States and West Germany. Research in
the Sociology of Education and Socialization, 7, 283­312.
Hastings, E. H., and P. K. Hastings. (1993­94; 1994­95). Index to Interna-
tional Public Opinion. Westport, CT: Greendwood Press.
Heclo, H. (1988). Generational politics. In J. C. Palmer, T. Smeeding, and
B. B. Torrey (Eds.), The vulnerable (pp. 381­442). Washington, DC:
Urban Institute Press.
Hodson, R., Welsh, S., Rieble, S., Jamison, C. S., & Creighton, S. (1993). Is
worker solidarity undermined by autonomy and participation? Patterns
from the chronographic literature. American Sociological Review, 58,
398­416.
Jerrome, D. (1996). Ties that bind. In A. Walker (Ed.), The new genera-
tional contract (pp. 81­99). London: University College of London
Press.
Kahn, R. (1979). Aging and social support. In M. W. Riley (Ed.), Aging from
birth to death. AAAS selected symposium (pp. 77­91). Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Lothar, P. (1993). Jeder irgenwis fur sich allein? Probleme und Chancen so-
zialer Interaktion am Arbeitspatz [Everyone somehow on their own?
Problems and opportunities for social interaction in the workplace].
Zeitschrift fur Soziologie, 22, 416­432.
Markovits, A. S., & Silvia, S. J. (1992). Federal Republic of Germany. In J.
Campbell (Ed.), European labor unions (pp. 167­183). Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Newman, K. S. (1993). Declining fortunes. The withering of the American
dream. New York: Basic Books.
Niemi, R. G., Mueller, J., & Smith, T. W. (1989). Trends in public opinion:
A compendium of survey data. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Reich, R. B. (1991). The work of nations. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Riley, M. W., Kahn, R. L., & Foner, A. (1994). Age and structural lag: Soci-
ety's failure to provide meaningful opportunities in work, family, and
leisure. New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W. (1994). Age integration and the lives of older
people. The Gerontologist, 34, 110­115.
Rones, P. L., Ilg, R. E., & Gardner, J. (1997). Trends in hours of work since
the mid-1970s. Monthly Labor Review, 120(4), 3­14.
Rosenbaum, J. F. (1978). The structure of inequality in school. Social
Forces, 57, 236­256.
Schor, J. B. (1991). The overworked American: The unexpected decline of
leisure. New York: Basic Books.
Sleemi, F. (1995). Collective bargaining outlook for 1995. Monthly Labor
Review, 118(1), 3­22.
Stinson, J. F., Jr. (1990). Multiple jobholding up sharply in the 1980s.
Monthly Labor Review, 11(7), 3­10.
Stinson, J. F., Jr. (1997). New data on multiple jobholding available from
the CPS. Monthly Labor Review, 120(3), 3­8.
Swensen, P. (1989). Fair shares: Unions, pay and politics in Sweden and
West Germany. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Taylor, P., & Walker, A. (1996). Intergenerational relations in the labor
market: The attitudes of employees and older workers. In A. Walker
(Ed.), The New Generational Contract (pp. 159­186). London: Univer-
sity College of London Press.
Turner, R. (1960). Modes of social ascent through education: Sponsored and
contest mobility. American Sociological Review, 25, 855­867.
Worndl, B. (1992). Mobilizing institutions: Labor unions. In W. Glatzer,
K. O. Hondrich, H. H. Noll, K. Stiehr, & B. Worndl (Eds.), Recent so-
cial trends in West Germany 1960­1990 (pp. 282­286). Montreal:
McGill­Queen's University Press.
The Future of Age Integration in Employment
John C. Henretta, PhD
Department of Sociology, University of Florida, Gainesville.
Retirement is a relatively new institution. Although
formal retirement programs have been traced to the
19th century (Graebner, 1988), most older workers
remained in the labor force until the creation of So-
287
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
cial Security (Ransom & Sutch, 1986). Those who did
retire before the development of public retirement sys-
tems depended primarily on family support or individ-
ual savings (Carter & Sutch, 1996; Costa, 1998; Grat-
ton, 1996). Moreover, the low levels of retirement
income available to most U.S. workers until the 1970s
made retirement primarily a safety net for those older
workers with declining health or unable to find a job.
Among women, retirement from employment as a
common life-course experience awaited the arrival at
retirement of cohorts with extensive lifetime employ-
ment--a development that has only occurred in recent
years. Hence, retirement for leisure is a new experi-
ence for the United States and other industrial societ-
ies and has existed in its current form for only about
25 years. Yet, this new pattern is now accepted as a
"matter-of-course" aspect of modern society.
Declining labor force participation among older
men and women (Gendell & Siegel, 1992) and the
growth of leisure retirement have been produced by
increases in Social Security benefits (Henretta & Lee,
1996; Ippolito, 1990), firm pensions (Hurd, 1990),
disability benefits (Henretta & Lee, 1996), and a
changing workplace (Henretta, 1994a). Earlier retire-
ment has produced a more age-segregated work-
place. Retirement institutions and other employment
changes remove older workers from the labor force at
relatively early ages more thoroughly than in the past.
In this essay, I discuss the direction and implica-
tions of current and possible future trends in work-
place age integration. If current trends were to con-
tinue over the next 20 years, we would not expect
much change in labor force participation patterns of
older workers. Yet, there is good reason to expect
that some of the trends supporting early retirement
may shift in the near future in ways that favor greater
labor force participation at older ages. I first discuss
these trends­demographic change, revisions in So-
cial Security retirement rules, and employment changes.
I then discuss the ways that these changes may lead
to a redefinition of the social significance of age and
encourage employers to implement job redesign that
will provide more attractive opportunities for older
workers. Equally important is the interest of older
workers in remaining in employment, and I discuss
this issue as well.
Though I will not actually measure age integration
quantitatively, the analysis will focus on the level of
labor force participation among the older population.
This focus ignores the proportion of the younger pop-
ulation in employment, although labor force partici-
pation rates of younger workers have changed over
time, particularly among women. Yet, as a practical
matter, labor force participation among older age
groups is currently so low that age integration of the
workplace may be examined by focusing on their
participation rates alone.
A Review of Recent Labor Force Participation Trends
The trends in men's and women's labor force par-
ticipation have diverged somewhat in recent years.
After large decreases in employment after age 60 dur-
ing the 1970s and early 1980s, the rate of decline for
men slowed noticeably during the late 1980s (Hen-
retta, 1994b). In the 1990s there has been virtually
no change in the percentage of men aged 60­64 in
the labor force, but between 1992 and 1997 there
was a slight increase from 55.3 to 55.6%. It is likely
that the declining unemployment and tight labor
markets of the 1990s played a part in stabilizing la-
bor force participation levels. However, the reasons
for the end of the early retirement trend are not well
understood (Quinn, 1997, 1998; Ruhm, 1996).
The trend for women is somewhat different be-
cause of the higher level of midlife employment char-
acteristic of more recent birth cohorts of women.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the percentage of
women aged 60­64 in the labor force increased very
slightly, reflecting a balance between a trend toward
earlier retirement and a trend toward higher midlife
labor force participation rates among successive birth
cohorts (Henretta, 1994b). These trends continued dur-
ing the 1990s, resulting in an increase in labor force
participation from 37.1% in 1992 to 40.2% in 1997.
These trends in labor force participation indicate
virtually no change in employment age integration
among persons 60­64 years old over the last 5 years.
In the following sections, I review three factors that
will be influential in determining the amount of em-
ployment age integration in the future: demographic
trends, changes in public benefit systems, and the
changing organization of work.
Demographic Context of the Early 21st Century
Age Composition
During the second decade of the next century, the
age composition of the U.S. population will be con-
siderably different than it is today. The large postwar
birth cohorts will be entering the age stratum that
currently has high retirement rates. Because the co-
horts that followed them were relatively small, the ra-
tio of workers approaching retirement to those in
younger age groups will be very different from today.
Table 1 shows the birth years of the four cohorts that
will be used to illustrate this process, and the ages of
their members in 1996 and 2016. The postwar co-
hort, born between 1952 and 1956, ages from 40­44
years old in 1996 to 60­64 years in 2016. The pre-
ceding depression cohort (born 1932­1936) and the
succeeding cohort (born 1972­1976) were both smaller
than this one. In addition to the size of the cohort at
birth, a cohort in later life is also affected by the mor-
tality and immigration that occurred earlier.
Table 1. Birth Cohorts Used in the Analysis
Birth Cohort Age in 1996 Age in 2016
1992­1996 20­24
1972­1976 20­24 40­44
1952­1956 40­44 60­64
1932­1936 60­64
288 The Gerontologist
The changing projected age composition of the
U.S. population between 1996 and 2015 is illustrated
in Table 2 by using these cohorts (middle series pro-
jections from Bureau of the Census, 1998a, 1998b). In
1996, the size of the 60­64 year age category was
about half (.48) that of the 40­44 age category and
slightly more than half (.56) that of the 20­24 age cat-
egory. Hence, the cohort entering the standard retire-
ment years around 1996 is relatively small in relation
to the remaining potential workforce. The birth co-
hort that was aged 40­44 in 1996 will be noticeably
reduced by mortality 20 years later. But, in relative
terms it will be approximately as large (.98) as the
population aged 40­44 at that time, and about .84
the size of the population aged 20­24. Hence, the
cohort entering the ages at which retirement occurs
will be relatively large.
The implication of this cohort succession is not
that cohort members literally replace each other in
specific jobs. The constant disappearance of some
jobs and the net creation of others in the economy is
much too complex for such a model. Moreover, de-
mography does not determine destiny. Population
age composition is only one of many factors affecting
employment patterns. But, given a particular level of
demand for experienced workers (or workers overall)
and holding other factors constant, the exit of the re-
tirement age cohort in 2016 (or 2015) will affect em-
ployers much more than retirement does today. Simi-
lar data are often used to illustrate the increasing cost
of retirement to the Social Security system or the im-
plications for financial markets (as older workers sell
their holdings to pay retirement expenses). A quite
different implication is the possible effect on employ-
ers who will be losing large numbers of trained em-
ployees--a proportion that will be much more no-
ticeable than the exit of retirees today. The implications
of age composition for age integration will be dis-
cussed below.
Education Level
Throughout this century, members of more recent
cohorts have been better educated than preceding
ones. The postwar birth cohorts are the last ones for
which this statement will be true. This change is illus-
trated by Table 3 (Bureau of the Census, 1996). Note
that the data shown in Table 3 are only for 1996. By
examining birth cohorts who had reached the age at
which almost all cohort members have completed
formal schooling, it is possible to compare levels of
attainment between cohorts. It can be seen that the
depression birth cohort, aged 60­64 in 1996, has
lower levels of schooling than younger cohorts. How-
ever, there is virtually no difference between the
early 1950s and late 1960s birth cohorts. This com-
parison uses ages 25­29 (born in 1967­71) instead of
ages 20­24 to capture those who have completed
most of their schooling. While the retirement of the
depression cohort will raise the educational level of
the workforce, the same will not be true of the retire-
ment of the 1950s cohort.
This comparison does not include all relevant fac-
tors affecting the relative educational level of co-
horts. First, it is possible that there will be more
midlife returns to school. If so, cohort levels of
schooling might increase noticeably throughout life.
These new patterns may not involve traditional de-
gree programs, and it is unclear whether today's
young or midlife cohort will be more affected over
the next 20 years. Second, it is often asserted that
older workers have outdated skills. While this state-
ment usually refers to job-specific training, one as-
pect of outdated skills has probably been the lower
general schooling level of older workers that makes
constant updating more difficult.
In future years, this outdating of skills (which can
be modified by lifelong learning) may be outweighed
by the decline in verbal ability. According to Alwin
(1991), verbal scores (adjusted for changes in educa-
tion levels) are lower in successive cohorts born
since the early part of the 20th century. However, up
until the birth cohort of approximately 1948, this de-
cline in verbal scores (controlling for education) was
outweighed by the positive effect of higher levels of
schooling on verbal scores. Hence, overall verbal
scores were stable or rising among successive co-
horts. Without more education to compensate for
their lower verbal ability, young cohorts in the future
may be less desirable employees than older cohorts.
The retiring cohort in 2016 will be the cohort born in
the early 1950s, just after the peak in verbal abilities.
Hence, one of the often-cited advantages of young
workers over old may no longer be true.
Health and Disability
Although the evidence is complex and sometimes
ambiguous (Crimmins, 1996), a growing number of
studies report better health and less disability among
members of successive cohorts in later life (Crim-
Table 2. Size (in millions) of the U.S. Population in Selected Age
Categories, 1996 and 2015
Population Size
Age 1996 2015
20­24 17.6 21.9
40­44 20.8 18.7
60­64 10.0 18.4
Source: Middle series projections from Bureau of the Census,
1998a, 1998b.
Table 3. Percentage High School and College Graduates,
Selected Ages in the U.S., 1996
Age % High School Graduates % College Graduates
25­29 88 28
40­44 89 28
60­64 76 20
Source: Bureau of the Census, 1996.
289
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
mins, Saito, & Reynolds, 1997; Manton, Corder, &
Stallard, 1993; Manton, Stallard, & Corder, 1997). If
the preliminary evidence suggesting improved health
among elderly people also indicates a trend that will
affect younger cohorts as they age, we would expect
future elderly cohorts to enjoy better health and more
vigor at later ages (e.g., Fogel & Costa, 1997). As with
education, cohort change in health (as well as in-
creasing longevity) may redefine the social meaning
of age. Ages that today are considered "old" may be
redefined as "middle-aged." Social and self-expecta-
tions for persons in their 60s and 70s may change
with better health and vigor, as may the willingness
of persons at these ages to engage in meaningful em-
ployment. Employers may change their attitudes in
line with the change in social expectations and be
more willing to create attractive opportunities for older
workers. To the extent that employers create such op-
portunities, the willingness of older employees to
continue working may depend, in part, on both their
health and their health-driven perception of the signif-
icance of being a particular age.
The Changing Context of Government Regulation
The Social Security retirement system has already
been modified to alter the age of benefit receipt. The
birth cohort of 1952 falls about in the middle of the
phase-in period for these changes. Their age for full
Social Security benefit receipt will be 66 years (in-
stead of the current 65 years). Those receiving bene-
fits at age 62 will receive 75% of the full amount,
compared to 80% today (Social Security Administra-
tion, 1995). While there is current discussion of pro-
posals to move the age of Social Security benefit eli-
gibility even later, further changes may not affect the
1952 birth cohort. A later eligibility age reduces the
attractiveness of early labor force exit; hence, its
likely qualitative effect is delayed retirement. It is dif-
ficult to predict the size of the effect because of the
importance of employer pension benefits, which are
projected to be more common and provide a higher
proportion of income in the period after 2010 (Reno,
1993). Workers with good employer defined pension
benefits may continue to retire early (Wise, 1997).
Some employers who wish to shed older workers
may supplement pensions to compensate for the So-
cial Security changes; or, alternatively, employers
may change pension plans to encourage later retire-
ment if they become concerned about losing a large
number of their trained workers to retirement. Work-
ers in poor health may continue to leave the labor
force with either Social Security disability benefits or
reduced Social Security retirement benefits. Those
workers with small or no pensions are likely to work
longer (Wise, 1997). While all these factors make the
quantitative effect of a change in the Social Security
retirement age uncertain, the expected effect of later
Social Security benefit receipt will clearly be in-
creased age integration in the workplace as more
older workers--especially those without company
pensions--continue in the labor force.
Changing Employment
The nature of employment also has been changing
in ways that are likely to encourage paid work at later
ages than today. Henretta (1994a), published as a
chapter in Age and Structural Lag (Riley, Kahn, &
Foner, 1994), examined the ways that age structures
employment careers through state and workplace
rules and institutions that provide both increasing re-
wards with longer tenure as well as a defined exit
point. Henretta argued that the long-term trend of in-
creasing institutional support for age-structured em-
ployment careers had halted or perhaps reversed.
This change has resulted from the combined effects
of trends in pension provision, the distribution of em-
ployment across industries, and the organization of
work within firms. The implication for younger work-
ers is that they are less likely to spend their careers in
jobs that provide increasing rewards and security for
longer tenure with the firm. For older workers, the
expectation is for more variable patterns of career
endings plus the possibility that more noncareer jobs
will be available to older workers. I summarize and
illustrate the argument below; greater detail and ref-
erences to the literature may be found in the original
source.
Changing Pensions
An increasing proportion of pension coverage in-
volves defined contribution pensions instead of the
more traditional defined benefit plans. The key char-
acteristic of defined contribution plans that reduces
the age structuring of employment is that they lack
the benefit "cliff" of defined benefit plans. That is,
many defined benefit plans strongly encourage retire-
ment relatively soon after first pension eligibility be-
cause the higher benefits accrued through further
work are not equal to the pension payments forgone
by working longer. By contrast, the growth in defined
contribution plans, which lack incentives to retire at
a specific age, reduces this strong incentive for early
retirement, though defined benefit incentives will
continue to affect many workers (Wise, 1997).
Changes in Industrial Structure
A second change in employment has been the
growth of service industries at the relative expense of
manufacturing. Firms in the service sector are more
likely to have contingent and part-time employment
arrangements. Service firms are smaller, tend to be in
competitive sectors, and must often adjust the work-
force to demand. Hence, they present more opportu-
nities for older workers to obtain part-time or short-
term employment contracts.
Within-Firm Changes in Employment
As a result of increasing competition and techno-
logical change, some employers keep a smaller pro-
portion of their employees in long-term "career" em-
ployment and more in shorter-term positions whose
continuation is contingent on demand. These trends
290 The Gerontologist
can be illustrated in academic employment, where
there appears to be a growth in the use of adjunct
faculty. Colleges and universities gain in two ways.
First, adjunct faculty cost less because of lower per-
course salary and lack of benefits. Second, use of ad-
junct faculty makes adjustments to changing student
demand easier. Proposals to end tenure in universi-
ties are, in part, directed toward the same end. Fixed-
term contracts would provide managers with greater
flexibility in determining the mix of teaching staff. In
the earlier article (Henretta, 1994a), I discuss evi-
dence that suggests a modest increase in the use of
these arrangements among employers generally. Os-
terman (1988) points to two limitations on use of
these contingent labor arrangements. First, employ-
ers' use of contingent labor in the postwar era has
been aided by the growing female labor force. As
more women move into full-time employment, there
may not be an adequate supply of contingent work-
ers. Second, employers are likely to want a mix of
long-term and short-term employees because there
are certain tasks they will not wish to entrust to part-
time employees.
While most workers continue to have relatively
long-term ties to their employers, the decrease in age
structuring has implications that vary by age and,
among older workers, by pension entitlement. This
point can be illustrated with the earlier example of
academic employment. While some young and midlife
faculty choose adjunct status because of family or
other responsibilities, the majority would probably
prefer more traditional age-structured employment.
For older faculty who have substantial accrued pen-
sion benefits, short-term teaching assignments do not
have the same drawbacks and may be attractive op-
portunities because they allow income supplementa-
tion and continued access to the life of the university
without the responsibilities of a full-time job. An older
faculty member (or any older worker) without substan-
tial pension entitlement would probably find a part-
time job no more attractive than a younger employee.
The Significance of Demographic Changes
Demographic changes have several potential ef-
fects. First, the large relative number of older workers
in the future and their relatively high educational
level is likely to make them highly sought after in a
number of fields. Conditional on the continued
growth of employment, the shift in the ratio of older
to younger workers implies that employers may be
less likely to encourage early retirement and, instead,
may take steps to retain older workers. Such steps
might include the redesign of jobs so that older em-
ployees can take increased advantage of the leisure
afforded by their pension accumulations while con-
tinuing involvement in employment. The ability of
an increasing number of employers to offer such
opportunities will be aided by the shifting trends in
employment sectors and the changing within-firm or-
ganization of work. That is, the growth of work orga-
nization that focuses on shorter-term relationships
and increased subcontracting provides a natural area
to create jobs that will need workers and may be at-
tractive to older workers.
It is very likely that increased employment oppor-
tunities for older workers will be uneven. For exam-
ple, employers may encourage early retirement by
workers in declining employment areas while trying
to retain workers in growing areas. The segment of
the older working population without pension enti-
tlement or with low pension entitlement will con-
tinue to seek full-time employment, whereas those
with large pension entitlements may prefer shorter-
term commitments. The key point in considering
workforce age integration is the balance between
these different trends. Shifting population characteris-
tics will change the balance so that more workers
will be retained in the labor force because of em-
ployers' efforts. The increased use of defined contri-
bution pensions and the change in Social Security
benefit ages will increase workers' willingness to
continue work. The growing use of contingent em-
ployment may provide the vehicle through which
employers' and employees' interests will be joined.
Demographic change may also have an important
impact on institutions and culture. As large cohorts
have passed through youthful phases of life they have
spawned social and cultural revolutions (Braungart &
Braungart, 1986). Why should a large cohort passing
through later life not likewise change institutions? So-
cial structures treat young and old as distinct catego-
ries, compared to a large undifferentiated category of
adults between them. Both young and old people
have been assigned nonwork roles, whereas those in
the middle have been assigned work roles. Exclusion
from the central institution of a "work society" (Kohli,
1986) devalues older persons because they are effec-
tively excluded from the most important institution
signifying adult status. A large cohort moving through
later life may challenge such stereotypes. Improved
health may push back the age at which members of
this cohort define themselves as "old." High levels of
education may lead many to be dissatisfied with the
social roles commonly assigned to older people.
And, the large size of the cohort will mean that older
people will have a large effect on social attitudes
through their involvement in consumption, politics,
the workplace, and other spheres of life.
The redefinition of age and aging does not imply
that everyone will want to work longer. Some will ea-
gerly choose leisure or meaningful involvement out-
side of employment, aided by pensions and private
saving. But, the key point is that a large older cohort in
good health has the potential for a revolutionary re-
definition of aging­both with respect to employment
and social involvement generally. Such a change
would support the attempts by employers to attract or
retain older employees.
Will Older Employees Want To Work Longer?
The discussion to this point has focused primarily
on the demand for older workers--changes in the
291
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
older population and the nature of employment that
may lead some employers to hire or retain older
workers. What will be the supply of older workers to
fill this demand? Changes in Social Security will
mean that those workers without pensions are likely
to work longer. The shift to defined contribution
plans reduces the number of persons affected by the
incentive for early retirement found in many defined
benefit plans. On the other hand, the higher propor-
tion of workers projected to receive pension benefits
may reduce the number of persons interested in con-
tinued work.
Another way to examine possible supply of older
workers is to examine the attitudes of today's older
workers toward retirement, focusing on questions
that imply interest in the types of flexible employ-
ment that may be offered in the future. The Health
and Retirement Study, conducted with respondents
aged 51­61 in 1992, contains a number of questions
about postretirement plans. Most useful for this anal-
ysis is a question asked of all respondents: "Some
people want to stop paid work entirely when they re-
tire, while others would like to continue doing some
paid work. What about you?" Responses to this ques-
tion indicate that an overwhelming majority of men
and women say they would like to continue some
paid work­over 77% for men and 71% for women.
Yet, other evidence from this survey suggests that
there is only limited flexibility in the current jobs
held by this cohort. Of those respondents who are
currently working, a large majority are employees,
with only 23% of men and 14% of women being self-
employed. Self-employment may give greater flexi-
bility in determining the amount one will work,
though that is not always the case (Hurd, 1993). For
example, self-employment in a job that requires a
large capital investment may not be profitable unless
it is pursued full time. Among current employees,
85% of men and 65% of women usually work 35 or
more hours for 50 or more weeks per year. Of these
full-time workers, relatively few say they could re-
duce their regular work hours on their current job.
About three quarters of men and women say it would
not be possible.
These data, taken together, allow some estimates
about the amount of flexibility to reduce hours
among the cohort now approaching retirement. This
estimate of flexibility is likely to err on the high side
because it is not necessarily the case that these indi-
cators reflect the amount of flexibility that would ac-
tually exist at older ages. If we assume that those who
are self-employed, who work less than full time, full
year, or who say they could reduce hours on their
current job have flexibility, half of currently em-
ployed men and 58% of women have some flexibil-
ity. The greater work flexibility of women is consis-
tent with their higher probability of being in contingent
employment. The percentage who have flexibility is
far below the percentage who say they would like
to continue some work after retirement. Moreover,
in the modal case (the full-time, full-year employee),
only about one quarter of respondents say they have
any flexibility in hours although most would like to
continue some work. The evidence suggests, there-
fore, that either significant job changing from prere-
tirement to postretirement jobs will be required, or
significant job redesign must occur.
The Redesign of Jobs
Job changes at retirement are often not a particu-
larly attractive option. Job skills may not be transfer-
able, and intangible aspects of a relationship with an
employer cannot be transferred. In many cases, con-
tinued work requires changing firms, entering low
paid employment, and not utilizing accumulated
skills. The absence of part-time opportunities inte-
grated in career-type employment reflects a rigidity
in employer behavior resulting from fixed costs in em-
ployment and the technology of production (Hurd,
1993) as well as employer attitudes. To the degree that
demographic change leads future employers to see
older workers as a large, desirable, and needed pool
of potential employees, they may engage in creative
job redesign and incur some costs in order to attract
this source of employees. The analysis of retirement
plans presented above suggests that older workers
would be interested in increased employment oppor-
tunities.
Negative Aspects of Increased Age Integration
of Employment
The costs and benefits of increased age integration
fall unevenly. An increase in older full-time workers,
drawn partly from those without firm pensions and
motivated by reduced age-62 Social Security retire-
ment benefits, will be a disadvantage to those in poor
health. On the other hand, greater opportunities in
full-time employment will benefit those who desire
continued full-time work and those in good health
who lack sufficient resources to retire. The growth
of the contingent labor force, attractive to some
younger workers, is unattractive to most because it
often offers less secure jobs. These disadvantages
may be less compelling for some older workers; yet,
they are purchased at the cost of greater insecurity
over the life course for all cohorts and, as discussed
earlier, contingent work would not be the first choice
of many older workers who lack significant pension
accumulation.
Conclusion
Social trends are seldom the result of one factor. I
have argued in this essay that a number of underlying
trends will combine in the near future, with the likely
result that more older persons will remain in the la-
bor force longer. Some trends are likely to produce
greater demand for older workers, assuming contin-
ued growth in employment. These trends include the
shifting population age composition and the high ed-
ucation and ability levels of cohorts born around
1950. Other changes will contribute to the supply of
older workers, including changes in Social Security
292 The Gerontologist
eligibility ages, the shift to defined contribution pen-
sion plans, and the improving health of successive
cohorts. The result of these changes is likely to be an
increase in the full-time employment of older work-
ers for those without pensions as well as more part-
time employment, particularly for those with signifi-
cant pension entitlement. The model for the type of
part-time or part-year employment that can join the
likely employer demand and worker supply is the re-
definition of jobs and the use of more short-term,
contingent employment arrangements. This model,
already used by employers for workers of all ages, is
an example of a work organization that may retain or
attract older workers. Data on workers nearing retire-
ment today indicate substantial interest in postretire-
ment part-time work. Hence, employer efforts to re-
tain older workers will likely meet with success,
leading toward greater age integration.
Acknowledgments
This essay was prepared under the auspices of the National Institute on
Aging Program on Age and Structural Change (PASC) for presentation at
the 1998 American Sociological Association Meeting in a session on "Pol-
icy Implications of Age Integration."
Address correspondence to John C. Henretta, P.O. Box 117330, Uni-
versity of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-7330. E-mail: jch@soc.ufl.edu
References
Alwin, D. F. (1991). Family of origin and cohort differences in verbal abil-
ity. American Sociological Review, 56, 625­638.
Braungart, R. G., & Braungart, M. M. (1986). Life-course and generational
politics. Annual Review of Sociology, 12, 205­231.
Bureau of the Census. (1996). Educational attainment in the United States,
March 1996. Current Population Reports, P20-493u. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Bureau of the Census. (1998a). Resident population of the United States:
Estimates, by age and sex (April 30, 1998) [On-line]. Available:
www.census.gov/population/estimates/nation/infile2-1.txt.
Bureau of the Census. (1998b). Resident population of the United States:
Middle series projections, 2015­2030, by age and sex (March, 1996)
[On-line]. Available: www.census.gov/population/projections/nation/
nas/npas1530.txt.
Carter, S. B., & Sutch, R. (1996). Myth of the industrial scrap heap: A revi-
sionist view of the turn of the century American retirement. Journal of
Economic History, 56, 5­38.
Costa, D. L. (1998). The evolution of retirement: Summary of a research
project. American Economic Review, 88, 232­236.
Crimmins, E. M. (1996). Mixed trends in population health among older
adults. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 51B, S223­S225.
Crimmins, E. M., Saito, Y., & Reynolds, S. L. (1997). Further evidence on
recent trends in the prevalence and incidence of disability among older
Americans from two sources: The LSOA and the NHIS. Journal of Ger-
ontology: Social Sciences, 52B, S59­S71.
Fogel, R. W., & Costa, D. L. (1997). A theory of technophysio evolution,
with some implications for forecasting population, health care costs,
and pension costs. Demography, 34, 49­66.
Gendell, M., & Siegel, J. S. (1992). Trends in retirement age by sex, 1950­
2005. Monthly Labor Review, 115(7), 22­29.
Graebner, W. (1980). A history of retirement: The meaning and function of an
American institution, 1885­1978. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gratton, B. (1996). The poverty of impoverishment theory: The economic
well-being of the elderly 1890­1950. Journal of Economic History, 56,
39­61.
Henretta, J. C. (1994a). Social structure and age-based careers. In M. W.
Riley, R. L. Kahn, & A. Foner (Eds.), Age and Structural Lag (pp. 57­79).
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Henretta, J. C. (1994b). Recent trends in retirement. Reviews in Clinical
Gerontology, 4, 71­81.
Henretta, J. C. & Lee, H. (1996). Cohort differences in men's late-life labor
force participation. Work and Occupations, 23, 214­235.
Hurd, M. D. (1990). Research on the elderly: Economic status, retirement,
and consumption and savings. Journal of Economic Literature, 28,
565­637.
Hurd, M. D. (1993). The effect of labor market rigidities on the labor force
behavior of older workers. Working Paper 4462. Cambridge, MA: Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Ippolito, R. A. (1990). Toward explaining early retirement after 1970. In-
dustrial and Labor Relations Review, 53, 556­569.
Kohli, M. (1986). The world we forgot: A historical review of the life
course. In V. W. Marshall (Ed.), Later life: The social psychology of ag-
ing (pp. 271­303). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Manton, K. G., Corder, L. S., & Stallard, E. (1993). Estimates of change in
chronic disability and institutional incidence and prevalence rates in
the U.S. elderly population from the 1982, 1984, and 1989 National
Long Term Care Survey. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 48,
S153­S166.
Manton, K. G., Stallard, E., & Corder, L. (1997). Changes in the age depen-
dence of mortality and disability: Cohort and other determinants.
Demography, 34, 135­158.
Osterman, P. (1988). Employment futures. New York: Oxford.
Quinn, J. F. (1997). Retirement trends and patterns in the 1990s: The end
of an era? The Public Policy and Aging Report, 8(3), 10­15.
Quinn, J. F. (1998). Employment and the elderly. The Gerontologist, 38,
254­259.
Ransom, R. L., & Sutch, R. (1986). The labor of older Americans: Retire-
ment of men on and off the job, 1870­1937. Journal of Economic
History, 46, 1­30.
Reno, V. P. (1993). The role of pensions in retirement income. In R. V.
Burkhauser, & D. L. Salisbury (Eds.), Pensions in a changing economy
(pp. 19­32). Washington, DC: Employee Benefit Research Institute.
Riley, M. W., Kahn, R. L., & Foner, A. (Eds.). (1994). Age and structural lag.
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Ruhm, C. J. (1996). Historical trends in the employment and labor force
participation of older Americans. In W. H. Crown (Ed.), Handbook on
employment and the elderly (pp. 81­102). Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Social Security Administration. (1995). Annual statistical supplement,
1995. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wise, D. A. (1997). Retirement against the demographic trend: More older
people living longer, working less and saving less. Demography, 34,
83­96.
Age Integration as a Solution to Work­Family Conflict
Karyn Loscocco, PhD
Department of Sociology, State University of New York at Albany.
The work­family conflict faced by people in the
middle stages of life, when role demands are at their
peak, is hardly news. In fact, work­family conflict has
gone from a "side bar issue" to a "front page phenom-
293
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
enon" (Googins, 1991). While the private and public
spheres offer mostly inadequate solutions, and indi-
viduals mostly muddle through, researchers and so-
cial analysts are sounding an alarm. It is time to dis-
cuss solutions as far-reaching and revolutionary as
the changes that have brought us to this critical point.
I propose that a more fully age-integrated society, in
which people intersperse education, work, and lei-
sure over the life course, could be such a solution.
The age-integrated model of society (Riley, 1994) is
an "ideal type" that provides a comprehensive frame-
work for possible change; it is one that integrates cur-
rent thinking from family and gender scholars, orga-
nizational scholars, corporate consultants, and analysts
of work and the economy.
The Crux of Work­Family Conflict: Social Change
and Structural Lag
The main source of work­family conflict is the ero-
sion of the gender division of labor that was the foun-
dation of the industrial era and the age-segregated life
course. With women caring for children and running
households, men had been able to focus their ener-
gies on work. By 1992, only 18% of families followed
the traditional model of employed husband and
homemaker wife (Reskin & Padavic, 1994). Even
mothers of young children, that last bastion of female
reserve, have a labor force participation rate of 63%,
five times higher than it was in 1950 (Cherlin, 1998).
Thus, the majority of working men have lost the ad-
vantages of having someone managing their personal
lives, and they are losing that advantage sooner after
their children arrive than in decades past.
Of course, women in the labor force have never
enjoyed such an arrangement. Experts estimate that
by the year 2000 there will be more women than
men in the labor pool from which employers draw
new entrants into the workforce (Stautberg, 1987).
The vast majority of women currently in the labor
force are in their childbearing years, and 80 to 90%
of these women are expected to have children during
their working lives (Galinsky, Friedman, & Hernan-
dez, 1991; Stautberg, 1987). Increases in births out-
side of marriage and steady divorce rates of about
50% mean that there are far more single parents in
the labor force than ever before. One recent study
found that 23% of mothers in the workforce were sin-
gle parents (Galinsky & Bond, 1996). Thus, a very
small and ever shrinking percentage of the labor
force benefits from the unpaid work of a full-time
homemaker. At the same time, caregiving for elders
is something that people are increasingly likely to
take on at multiple times over the life course (Marks,
1996; Moen, Robinson, & Fields, 1994).
Yet, social institutions have not adapted to these
tremendous changes in the ways that people live
their work and family lives. There is a "structural lag"
in the relationship between the two dynamisms that
are played out in every society: the dynamism of
changing lives has been outstripping the dynamism
of structural change (Riley, 1987). More people from
all walks of life experience work­family conflict as
they wait for social structures to recognize that they
are not free to devote themselves to work for several
consecutive decades. Now that the responsibilities
for work and family are not divided neatly along gen-
der lines in most families, workers increasingly expe-
rience role overload; they simply have too much to
do. One study of working people found almost "uni-
versal exhaustion" (Googins, 1991, p. 302). Others
document a sense of freneticism in the families that
they studied "up close" (Helgesen, 1998; Hochs-
child, 1997). Working parents also experience role
strain, because work and family compete and con-
flict (e.g., Greenhaus, 1988; Kanter, 1977).
Because work institutions have largely continued to
operate without paying attention to employees' per-
sonal lives, individuals and families shoulder the bur-
den of keeping their family lives from intruding too
much upon work. Work, of course, continues to spill
over into family lives. Yet, now most families do not
have a wife at home to buffer work's impact. In an ex-
haustive review of research done in the 1980s, Men-
aghan and Parcel (1990) found well-documented evi-
dence of role strain in dual earner households at all
socioeconomic levels. Although some studies suggest
that work­family conflict is experienced similarly by
men and women (Frone, Russell, & Cooper, 1992;
Keith & Schafer, 1980), there is also evidence that
women continue to bear primary responsibility for
home and family and the brunt of work­family conflict
(Duxbury, Higgins, & Lee, 1994; Pleck, 1985; Simon,
1992; Thoits, 1986).
Leisure is perhaps the greatest casualty of the
work­family crunch, especially among women. Peo-
ple attend to the pressing, immediate needs of jobs
and children, relegating their social and personal
lives to the "back burner" (Barnett & Rivers, 1996, p.
93). With so many people weighed down by work­
family conflict, communities suffer as well. People
have more limited time and energy for volunteer
work. Nor can they as easily nurture the friendships
and neighborly relations that have often been key
sources of social support (Googins, 1991).
Families are expected to solve the dilemmas of try-
ing to raise children, have fulfilling personal lives,
maintain their schools and communities, and devote
themselves to work--while government and corpora-
tions mostly take a hands-off approach. Existing solu-
tions are largely piecemeal, and do little to alter the
dominance of work institutions over individual lives.
Nor do they challenge the traditional model of the
life course; instead, they assume a standard sequence
of education, work and family, and then leisure. Fi-
nally, they do not acknowledge the kinds of funda-
mental changes in social structure that are needed if
work­family balance is to go from a much-touted
ideal to a much-needed reality. We are at a juncture
that may be every bit as significant as the shift to the
separate work and family spheres of industrial society
(Googins, 1991; Rifkin, 1995; Siegel, 1990). Although,
short-term solutions are vital, it is also time to con-
sider the larger social changes that would be required
294 The Gerontologist
to provide lasting benefits to individuals and to soci-
ety (Moen, 1992).
Age Integration as a Potential Solution
The age-integrated model of social structure pro-
vides the kind of template that is useful if society
works toward a comprehensive solution to the urgent
problem of work­family conflict. As scholars of aging
and age stratification, Matilda White Riley and col-
leagues noted that changes in the ways that people
"grow up and grow old" had not been matched by
changes in how the life course was set up. The bio-
logical and social underpinnings of the typical edu-
cation, work/family, and leisure sequence had been
altered, leading to strains on institutions and individ-
uals (Riley, 1987; Riley & Riley, 1994). The solution
they proposed was to move toward greater age inte-
gration by diminishing age barriers and bringing peo-
ple of different ages together. No longer would age
determine what roles an individual holds; instead,
opportunities in all structures--education, work, fam-
ily, leisure--would be open to people of every age,
within the limits of biology (Best, 1980; Riley & Ri-
ley, 1994). Though the impetus for the age-integra-
tion perspective came from the study of older people
who were enjoying unprecedented long and healthy
lives, Riley and colleagues have long emphasized the
interconnections among different age strata (e.g., Ri-
ley, Foner, & Waring, 1988). Thus, they have argued
that age integration would enhance the quality of life
not just for older people but for people of all ages.
The Promise of Age Integration
Ideally, a society in which people intersperse edu-
cation, work, and leisure over the course of their
lives is one in which role strain and role overload at
midlife can be dramatically lessened. With work
spread out over the entire course of a lifetime, the
most intense period of many jobs and careers would
not have to come at the height of family responsibili-
ties. People would be free to choose the optimal time
for their intense periods of commitment to new em-
ployers or new careers. One group of researchers re-
cently suggested that women would do best to have
their children early and postpone their careers until
their youngest child was about 13, because their
analyses showed much less work­family conflict at
that point (Higgins & Duxbury, 1994). Others contend
that establishing oneself at work first, and having
children much later in life, may be the best work­
family strategy (Sekaran & Hall, 1989). As child rearing
has become increasingly removed from biological
capacity, the latter choice can be taken more seri-
ously. In the next wave, young women will be able to
freeze their eggs and fertilize them later in life. These
and other patterns that de-couple work and family
would be normative in a more age-integrated society.
Nor would education and training be crowded
into the earliest stages of life, but instead be accepted
as a possibility throughout life. In fact, continuous
learning may be required by current and predicted
future turbulence in the labor market. As Kuttner
(1997) argues, the labor market has become a prod-
uct market where employers buy labor only for as
long as they need it. To fit this new reality, future ca-
reers would be a series of mini-learning stages, and
career stages would be measured by the nature of the
job rather than the chronological age of the job's in-
cumbent (Hall & Mirvis, 1995). Hall (1989) suggests
that organizations that do away with age-based pro-
motion systems will be at an advantage, as people
live longer and desire continued employment.
The age-integration model could also address the
paradox that whereas women experience the most
work­family conflict, they have benefited in noneco-
nomic ways from their mass movement into the paid
labor force. Researchers have shown that multiple
roles are actually beneficial to well-being (Baruck,
Barnett, & Rivers, 1983; Moen, McClain, & Williams,
1989; Thoits, 1986). Such findings support Marks'
(1977) contention that commitment and energy are
not scarce resources, but expandable ones. Further-
more, studies have documented that paid work pro-
vides physical and mental health benefits for women
(e.g., Baruch et al., 1983). Still, as Moen (1992) points
out, employment is good for women only under cer-
tain social conditions; it leads to role strain and role
overload particularly when children are young. Re-
search suggests that spending moderate amounts of
time on paid work, marital, and parental roles buffers
the distress caused by caring for elderly parents, but
too much time in these multiple roles exacerbates the
distress (Voydanoff & Donnelly, 1999). In a society in
which roles were spread out, and reduced work
schedules were more normative, people could re-
duce work when their family demands were greatest.
There is every reason to believe that people could
have multifaceted lives in a more age-integrated soci-
ety. In fact, the age integrated model frees people to
add more roles to their lives once work plays a
smaller part.
A widespread revamping of the life course could
address the problems of all kinds of workers, rather
than focusing on the relatively privileged, as is cur-
rently the case. As one example, in a society in
which people were no longer expected to get their
education and then "hit the career ground running,"
poor teenage mothers might not be as quickly rele-
gated to a life of trying to play "catch up." With more
people taking education, leisure or family breaks
from full-time work, there would also be a more eq-
uitable distribution of work. Currently, fewer and
fewer people are working, but they are working
longer and longer hours (Bluestone and Rose, 1997;
Schor, 1991). Books titled The End of Work (Rifkin,
1995), The Jobless Economy (Dunkerley, 1996), and
When Work Disappears (Wilson, 1996) warn of a fu-
ture in which there will be even less work available.
An age integrated society could provide more soci-
etal balance in work hours and help alleviate the
very real, but often overlooked, work­family conflict
felt by those who cannot find enough work to make
ends meet.
295
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
It could also help meet the demands of the grow-
ing numbers of older people who seek employment.
People are living longer and healthier, and nearly
one third of the average adult life is now spent in re-
tirement. The concept of growing old in a context that
does not include paid work is new (Googins, 1991).
There has been an increase in self-employment and
part-time work among older people (Fuchs, 1982;
McKie, 1992) and a reversal of men's tendency to re-
tire earlier and earlier (Burkhauser & Quinn, 1997),
suggesting that many have rejected this concept.
The age-integration perspective can further public
policy initiatives by urging employers and govern-
ment to consider work­family issues as part of a
larger set of life course issues, rather than an isolated
phenomenon of relatively short duration. When we
take into account people of all ages, our solutions
will be less piecemeal, and they are apt to foster in-
tergenerational cooperation instead of competition
(Riley, 1994). For example, if programs to let people
cut back when they have heavy family responsibili-
ties were to free-up paid jobs for older people, this
could simultaneously solve the work­family strain of
midlife and help to ease the social security crisis.
Also, if people in the middle stages of life were less
consumed by work responsibilities, they would be
able to help older relatives in need of assistance.
Finally, integration of education and leisure through-
out longer work lives would address the dominance
of work institutions over family ones. Integrating ma-
jor role activities throughout the labor force requires
scaling back on the time and energy given to work.
Thus, unlike many popular work­family programs,
the rephased life course would free people from the
current demands of work, rather than simply help
them to accommodate to those demands (Gonyea &
Googins, 1996). This has become increasingly ur-
gent. Hochschild's (1997) study of a family-friendly
company she called Amerco showed that, as the
workplace takes up more time, family time be-
comes increasingly rationalized, commodified, and
compressed. A vicious cycle drains family life of its
former "haven" qualities and perpetuates the imbal-
ance, as people increasingly turn to work to escape
the pressures and "nothingness" of their sped-up, com-
modified home lives. Hochschild argues that, in a cu-
rious twist, many now view work as more of a haven.
A study of women in the heart of the suburban Mid-
west uncovered a similar disturbing hectic pace of
home life (Helgesen, 1998). Goldscheider and Waite
(1991) warn that interactions within families are vitally
important, and unless more attention is given to the
home, society will end up with "no families."
Making the Age-Integrated Model Work
To benefit from the new possibilities afforded by
age integration, new policies would be needed that
support these possibilities.
First, outmoded definitions and measures of com-
mitment to work would have to change. "Face time,"
or hours worked, is an odd measure of loyalty or pro-
ductivity, yet companies continue to use it as a
proxy, forcing many people to work far more hours
than they would like (Clarkenberg, 1998). The whole
concept of the current 9-to-5, 40 hours of work, con-
ducted in a central location, is a vestige of an indus-
trial economy with separate spheres for men and
women. Once we recognize that centralized work
places, fixed work schedules, and time-based defini-
tions of work commitment are socially constructed
products of an earlier era (Bailyn, 1993; Harriman,
1982; Hinrichs, Roche, & Sirianni, 1991), it pushes
us to think about the benefits of flexplace, flextime,
and shorter work schedules in this very different
postindustrial period. Bailyn (1993) proposes that the
concept of the "family wage," so integral to the gen-
dered separate spheres model of industrial work, be
replaced with the notion of the "family workweek."
Such a change would facilitate the creation of flexi-
ble policies that let individuals and couples arrange a
reasonable work­family arrangement. Harriman (1982)
contends that companies could organize their work
differently without compromising efficiency. While
some consumers have surely experienced the ineffi-
ciencies of part-timers and job sharers, and the loss
in quality that can result from tired employees on
compressed work weeks, these is no a priori reason
that more systematic and creative planning could not
solve such problems.
Many of the most popular solutions to work­fam-
ily conflict today offer snapshot fixes in keeping with
the notion of discrete life stages. An age-integrated
perspective suggests policies that recognize the di-
verse needs of people at all phases of their lives. With
a more integrated approach to leisure, an employee
might work for a year at 20% pay in trade for 10
weeks off (Harriman, 1982). Employees might be
able to accumulate hours over the course of their
work lives, which they could use to cut back on work
or take a leave, without jeopardizing their job or their
family's standard of living. Denmark and Belgium are
already experimenting with such programs (Moss,
1996). Even workers on reduced time schedules
could bank leave over the course of several fiscal
years (Harriman, 1982).
Changes in the nature of work and advances in com-
munication technologies could be used to move back
toward a more home-based work center, in which work
is a part of the natural rhythm of day-to-day life (Siegel,
1990). This might not be the ideal for all people all of
the time. People certainly vary in how much separation
between work and family they desire. Still, for many
people, personal computers, the Internet, faxes, phone
message systems, and conference calls provide enor-
mous flexibility. These can be temporary or more per-
manent solutions to the dual desire to have a productive
work career and to enjoy family life.
Organizations would have to become more com-
fortable with such arrangements, which seems to be
the trend. In fact, a survey by Olsten Corp. Compa-
nies reported that almost one third of U.S. companies
encourage their employees to telecommute. Among
companies with telecommuting options, 86% experi-
296 The Gerontologist
enced increased productivity (Staffing Industry Re-
port, 1995, cited in Celente, 1997). It would certainly
be easier for people across the socioeconomic spec-
trum to do more of their work from home if compa-
nies and tax policies subsidized the expense. While
most professionals can easily afford the equipment
required, the clerical worker who is a single mother
may not have that luxury. Still, she could fit in some
crucial work from home to give her greater flexibility
to balance work and parenting responsibilities.
Scheduling flexibility, or flextime, is the most
widely adopted work­family policy in place today.
Though variation in supervisor support, program spe-
cifics, and individual needs may account for the in-
consistent reports on the benefits of flextime reported
by Glass and Estes (1997), there is reason enough to
expand such policies both within and across organi-
zations. For example, one study of nurses uncovered
many tangible benefits of flexibility, including less
work­family conflict and fewer mental and physical
health problems (Thomas & Ganster, 1995). A study
of public sector employees found that those using
flextime reported more work­family balance and
higher job satisfaction (Ezra & Deckman, 1996).
Among a sample of 178 employers with company-
sponsored child care, 53% saw a decline in absen-
teeism and 39% reported lower rates of lateness (Bu-
rud, Aschbacher, & McCroskey, 1984).
It is also important for companies to extend op-
tions for flexible and reduced work schedules to
lower level employees. Although upper level white-
collar workers are the usual beneficiaries of such pol-
icies, the same benefits would likely accrue to lower
level employees and their companies. In fact, when
Steelcase manufacturing company extended part-
time schedules and job-sharing benefits to hourly
employees, they reaped a turnover rate of just 3%
(Dynerman & Hayes, 1991). Of course, companies
must go beyond putting "family friendly" policies in
place; company culture must also recognize and sup-
port the work­family conflict faced by many employ-
ees. Supervisor support of employees' nonwork de-
mands has been associated with reduced work­family
conflict, employee distress and absenteeism, and with
greater job satisfaction and employee well-being
(Frone et al., 1997; Kossek & Nichol, 1992; Thomas &
Ganster, 1995).
Creative programs and policies based on different
sets of values would also help realize the full poten-
tial of a more age-integrated society. As one exam-
ple, Betty Friedan (1991) has suggested a voucher
system in which every person who cares for children
or elders at home would get compensation, perhaps
in the form of a tax rebate. The person would get
equal credit in the wage earning partner's pension
and Social Security benefits, which would be re-
tained in the event of a divorce. If both parents
worked and shared child or elder care, they could
use the voucher to pay for help. This would certainly
be a marked improvement over current law, which
discriminates against families that take care of their
own children (Siegel, 1990).
Rifkin's (1995) notion of a revitalized third sec-
tor--a volunteer or social economy--could be a key
component of an age-integrated society. Throughout
their lives, people might receive a "social wage" in
return for community service work. One possibility
would be that people would receive a tax credit for
every hour that they volunteer. People at all ages
who are in periods of lesser time commitment to
work--working part time or pursuing education, for
example--could do more volunteering. Some might
even take community service sabbaticals.
Individual change also plays a role in the ease
with which we could move to a more age-integrated
society. As others have argued (e.g., Kofodimos,
1993; Schwartz, 1992), people have to be willing to
ask tough questions and implement the answers in
their quest for more balanced lives. More of us have
to realize that it is fairly impossible to "have it all"--
at least not all at once. The message of the age-inte-
grated model is that it may well be possible to "have
it all" over the course of one's life--and the "all" may
be a lot more enjoyable when it is spread out. Al-
though institutions continue to lag behind, individu-
als can continue to nudge society in the right direc-
tion by using the opportunities that they do have for
reducing work­family conflict.
Ideally, jobs would be improved as part of a revi-
sion of the pattern of the life course. Many people
want to retire because their jobs are too stressful, or
not challenging enough, or require too much time.
There is surely a segment of people who would be
hard pressed to imagine giving up their justly de-
served period of leisure at the end of years of produc-
tive labor (Riley, 1998). In fact, some people keep
themselves going through the midlife crunch by fo-
cusing on the retirement light at the end of the work
tunnel. The growing numbers of the working poor
never have the chance to enjoy a leisurely retire-
ment. Yet, better part-time jobs and enriched jobs,
reasonable work demands, and supportive work en-
vironments would make it easier for people to con-
tinue working into the later decades of their life. The
key to a viable rephased life course is a different no-
tion of career. If the work career were no longer one
long, uninterrupted obligation, then workers would
have periods of leisure that might revitalize them and
contribute to their greater work productivity.
Overcoming the Obstacles
Although the tremendous changes required to
break down society's age barriers are not easily ac-
complished, current trends and historical precedent
provide cause for optimism. Overcoming three major
"sticking points" could lead to the realization of a so-
ciety in which people move in and out of education,
work, and leisure over the course of their lives,
thereby reducing work­family conflict.
Standard of Living
The first obstacle is the almost certain lowered av-
erage standard of living that would result in a society
297
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
that distributed work more evenly across the life span
and therefore across the socioeconomic spectrum. To
overcome it, the notion of standard of living would
have to shift from its almost purely material definition
to one that encompassed a broader range of less tan-
gible "goods," such as time, well-being, and balance.
No longer would work identity have preeminence as
a measure of self-worth.
This may appear to be a daunting obstacle. Those
who benefit from deeply embedded race, class, and
gender inequalities are unlikely to "give up" some of
their work so that others can have more. This trend
toward bifurcation--people are either overworked or
struggling to find enough work--has apparently been
exacerbated by recent economic developments (Blue-
stone & Rose, 1997; Schor, 1991). Still, Rifkin (1995)
suggests that continued loss of jobs across industrial
sectors and at all levels of the prestige hierarchy may
force a shift in thinking about the importance of paid
work. In addition, there is some evidence that people
are beginning to think more carefully about how
much money (and therefore work) they need.
For instance, recent analyses of data from the Na-
tional Study of Families and Households show that
34% of women and 44% of men would prefer to
work fewer hours than they do. Furthermore, while
both husband and wife have some type of part-time
schedule in only 1 in 50 couples, a much greater
number (1 in 6) would like such a situation (Clarken-
berg, 1998). The untapped potential for widespread
change in how much we work is revealed in two ad-
ditional findings. First, Clarkenberg finds only modest
effects of life stage on work preferences. While hav-
ing young children does lead women to feel they are
working too much, there are no preference differ-
ences between those with older children and those
with no children. Second, men who work long hours
are highly likely to say that they would like to work
less, and this finding holds irrespective of the amount
of time their wives work. Even when their wives are
full-time homemakers or work part time, and are
therefore free to take care of household responsibili-
ties, these men want to do less paid work.
Hochschild (1997, pp. 253­254) reports a particu-
larly interesting example of changing work values
from ELI, a computer company in Portland, Oregon,
where employees voted to "spread the pain" when
the company hit hard times, reducing their hours
(and pay) so that no one would be laid off. Much to
the CEO's surprise, employees did not want to go
back to the full-time schedules they were offered
when the company recovered.
The "voluntary simplicity" movement touts just
such a shift to reducing standard of living and
thereby improving quality of life. The movement has
certainly been receiving a lot of media attention, and
though there are not a lot of hard data, trend-trackers
predict that a return to simplicity will be widespread
in the next century (e.g., Celente, 1997). Schor
(1991) reports the results of a Merck Family Fund na-
tional poll that lends support to this prediction. Close
to 60% of respondents said that they would like to
simplify their lives, and two thirds said they want
more balance in their lives. Schor argues that "down
shifters"--those who are working and spending
less--are in the vanguard of what could become a
major social trend. Schor's national survey of 800
adults showed that nearly one fifth had made a vol-
untary lifestyle change that lowered their income,
and 85% of them were happy about the change they
made. Interestingly, another 12% had made such a
change involuntarily, but even 25% of them reported
that the change was a "blessing in disguise."
The Dominance of Work Institutions
The second, closely related sticking point is the
long-standing dominance of work institutions over all
others in our society. To realize the potential of an
age-integrated society, current structures and sup-
porting norms that allow the dominance of work in-
stitutions would have to be altered. Companies
would have to accept that many peoples lives have
changed, making traditional work arrangements ob-
solete. The United States has been notoriously slow
to address this, as the long journey to a minimal Fam-
ily and Medical Leave Act demonstrates.
Still, there are many promising developments. The
current and projected surge in small business growth
may help to move society in the direction of greater
balance. Small business owners are probably more ea-
ger to join their employees in a partnership that places
as much value on flexibility as it does on income. One
survey showed that whereas only half of small busi-
nesses provide paid sick leave, they are more flexible
about unpaid, informal leaves (USSBA, 1987).
Perhaps, fledgling firms or organizations faced
with difficult times will help serve as the catalyst that
opens some employees' eyes to alternative ways of
defining standard of living. If they cannot match the
salaries that highly qualified applicants are offered
elsewhere, they might counter with a reduced work
schedule using the other offers as base pay.
Furthermore, management and organizational an-
alysts argue that companies make the kinds of
changes that help employees when they see a direct
benefit to the company. As Ferber and O'Farrell
(1991) point out, the really innovative programs to
reduce work­family conflict come from industries
that have the greatest difficulty recruiting labor. Com-
pany leaders may well be motivated by the mounting
evidence that employees think carefully about com-
panies' work­family policies as they choose their
jobs (Gonyea & Googins, 1996; Honeycutt & Rosen,
1997; Ransom, Aschbacher, & Burud, 1989). Re-
search also shows that people who are dissatisfied
with workplace flexibility (Rothausen, 1994) or desir-
ous of greater work schedule autonomy (Coakley and
Karren, cited in Thompson, Beauvais, & Lyness,
1999) are more apt to plan to leave their companies.
In addition, executives may respond to pressure
from groups working for greater work­family bal-
ance. For example, Working Mother magazine keeps
a list of the "100 best companies" for their readers.
298 The Gerontologist
Warner-Lambert made the list in 1999, after an ab-
sence of 6 years. When the editor-in-chief of the
magazine asked the CEO of Warner-Lambert if he
had made a conscious effort to get his company back
on their list, he replied, "We are very cognizant of
surveys like this. As a company you want to position
yourself as being an ideal employer so that you can
attract the best people. That clearly makes you a
leader." He went on to suggest that the old attitude
that employers can simply replace the people who
don't conform to their stringent work norms is a
costly one. "Turnover is incredibly expensive. Not
just in terms of hiring costs, either. . . . What about
the mistakes that happen because of the loss of expe-
rience? What about customers--they like to relate to
the same person. And experienced workers are just
more productive." (Culbreth, 1999).
If carefully designed future studies document the
likely economic benefits of a work institution that is
fully integrated with other social institutions, compa-
nies will make the necessary shifts. In the short term,
employers simply need to hear more about the grow-
ing body of research evidence that work­family poli-
cies have economic benefits for employers.
Gender Norms
The third obstacle is the persistence of gender
norms that define work­family conflict as a "women's
issue" and emphasize men's good provider role. Re-
search continues to confirm that women are more
likely to trade off income and prestige for part-time
work, job sharing, home-based and less lucrative
businesses, and jobs with "family friendly" work hours
(Henson, 1996; Loscocco, 1997; McKie, 1992; Rosen-
feld & Birkelund, 1995), which perpetuates a modi-
fied separate spheres model and, therefore, gender
inequality. Of course, women at the bottom of the
socioeconomic ladder, who are disproportionately
women of color, bear the greatest brunt of inequita-
ble gender norms. According to Ferber and O'Farrell
(1991), when low-income mothers leave work to care
for dependents it has long-term negative consequences
for income.
Until men share equally in the work and enjoy-
ment of family life, the similar life paths for men and
women proposed by the age integrated model will
not materialize. As Cherlin (1998) put it, "mothers
can't win unless fathers change too" (p. 41). Yet even
in those sectors of Western Europe where liberal pro-
family policies are motivated partly by a strong com-
mitment to gender equality (Moen & Firebaugh,
1994), men have yet to commit themselves equally to
work­family balance (Haas, 1992; Moen, 1989). As
long as power and prestige continue to accrue to
those who follow the traditional career paths, many
men will, quite reasonably, see little incentive for
change. Moreover, until men receive company and
social support for scaling back work, they will have
little realistic opportunity for change.
Forced by their circumstances, and with less to
lose in terms of gender identity, women have been in
the vanguard, charting alternative life patterns that
integrate and recycle their major social roles (Helge-
sen, 1998; Lopata, Barnewolt, & Miller, 1985). Yet, if
women are the ones choosing flexible and reduced
work schedules, getting reeducated, and trading time
for money, they will have less power in society and
in their relationships (Avioli & Kaplan, 1992; England
& Kilbourne, 1990). This concern surely underlies
the protest launched at Schwartz's (1989) proposal
that corporate women be offered the option of
slower, more flexible careers (the media-dubbed
"Mommy track"). Without extending the flexible
track to men, and more importantly, without chang-
ing the ways we evaluate careers and career require-
ments, women would be disadvantaged by a system
that asked them to make such a choice.
Similarly, while an age-integrated life course pro-
vides more freedom for the timing of child rearing,
women will be hurt if they are the ones who postpone
their careers or their child rearing in an attempt to re-
duce work­family conflict. In fact, the notion of a
nonsequential life course raises the specter of women
moving from one period of reduced work to another,
as they are channeled, and channel themselves, into
caring for children, communities, and elders.
Yet, as more men are forced off the lockstep educa-
tion-work-leisure pathway by downsizing and contin-
ued technological change, alternative career paths
and nonmaterial values may well become more nor-
mative for everybody. The movement to voluntary
simplicity might also lead to greater gender equality,
as men join women in questioning the relative role of
work in their lives. There is also evidence that men are
taking on a greater share of family responsibility
(Presser, 1989), which ultimately may lead them to
search with women for more accommodating work-
places. In fact, there is growing concern about work­
family balance among men (Thomas & Ganster,
1995), and recent studies document men's higher lev-
els of work-to-family and strain-based family-to-work
conflict (Eagle et al., 1998) and their substantial trade-
offs between work and family (Milkie and Peltola,
1999). One study showed that even among a sample
of male executives, who might be expected to sub-
scribe fully to traditional gender norms, family-friendly
work policies were associated with lower work­family
conflict (Judge, Boudreau, & Bretz, 1994).
In addition, we have only to look back a few de-
cades to see the potential for fundamental change in
gender norms. There has been a "gender revolution"
in women's work roles, as more and more work roles
have opened up for women and social norms as well
as structures have changed in response. If women
and men join in a social movement that pushes for
the changes in gender norms that would promote
greater work­family balance, social structures are apt
to respond to the collective pressure (Riley and
Loscocco, 1994). The rapid changes in student norms
and lifestyles in the 1960s demonstrated vividly how
quickly basic social values can be altered through
collective action (Foner, 1994).
In the short term, social policy should shift away
299
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
from a primary focus on the care of children, which
is still seen as a women's issue by so many people,
including those in a position to effect change. In fact,
increased longevity means that the time during
which people are raising young children is now a
small proportion of the entire life course (Riley,
1992). Also, more people are choosing not to raise
children at all. Instead, the issues could be framed in
terms of "caring responsibilities that could extend to
a whole range of relationships and even to oneself"
(Moss, 1996, p. 31). If discussion turns to employee-
friendly policies that promote self-enrichment or al-
low more vacation time for a reduced salary, perhaps
more men will listen carefully (Harriman, 1982) and
begin to press for change.
Conclusion
If the age integration "ideal type" were approxi-
mated in reality, we could address the work­family
conflict of midlife, the failure of our retirement sys-
tem to deal with the current realities of old age, and
children's needs to live in relaxed families and spend
time with their parents. If society makes the changes
needed to support a new social system in which edu-
cation, work, family, and leisure are not confined to
certain phases of the life course, there is potential for
greater social equality, as well. While age integration
may seem like a radical solution, in many ways it is
also a very conservative one (Moen, 1992). The fam-
ily could take on its child care responsibilities with
renewed vigor if education, work and leisure were
interspersed over the life course.
The next step, would be to move from the abstract
promise of greater age integration to concrete pro-
posals. There is tremendous need for carefully de-
signed research that can answer questions about the
promise and pitfalls of the kinds of solutions to work­
family conflict consistent with the age-integrated
model of society. Tough, creative policy work would
have to be done, and specific policies should take
into account the gender, race, and class inequalities
of the current U.S. society. The changes needed are
so profound that the whole proposition of moving to-
ward greater age integration may seem too daunting.
The multifaceted changes required of movement to
an age-integrated society lend themselves to criti-
cism. It is easy to zero in on a particular facet and
show why it would not work or what other chal-
lenges it might pose.
The more difficult, but ultimately more fruitful, tack
is to see specific sticking points as problems to be
solved, rather than as reasons to preserve the status
quo. There are already forces moving us toward age
integration (Moen, 1992; Riley, 1998). Foner (1994)
points out that even when there are obstacles to
change, it happens when the interests of those pushing
for change override the forces of resistance. Analysts
from a wide range of disciplines and with diverse cre-
dentials and concerns have offered up a wealth of
ideas to minimize the work­family "crunch." As Weick
(1994) has argued, social change is slow; yet, when
we set our sights on "small wins," there is every reason
to be optimistic. Because the obstacles to an age-inte-
grated society are interrelated, a small change that ad-
dresses any one of them is apt to exert pressure on an-
other. In the final analysis, the challenge of moving
toward fuller age integration seems to pale in compar-
ison with the possibility of stronger families, a more
balanced distribution of work, and fuller, more en-
riched lives.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Dr. Karyn Loscocco, Department of Sociol-
ogy, Social Science 340, SUNY­Albany, Albany, NY 12222. E-mail:
Kal74@csc.albany.edu
References
Avioli, P. S., & Kaplan, E. (1992). A panel study of married women's work
patterns. Sex Roles, 26, 227­241.
Bailyn, L. (1993). Breaking the mold: Women, men, and time in the new
corporate world. New York: The Free Press.
Barnett, R. C., & Rivers, C. (1996). She works, he works: How two-income
families are happier, healthier and better off. San Francisco: Harper.
Baruch, G., Barnett, R., & Rivers, C. (1983). Life prints: New patterns of
love and work for today's women. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Best, F. (1980). Flexible life scheduling: Breaking the education-work-
retirement lockstep. New York: Praeger.
Bluestone, B., & Rose, S., (1997). Overworked and unemployed. The
American Prospect, 31, 58­69.
Burkhauser, R. V., & Quinn, J. F. (1997). Pro-work policy proposals for
older Americans in the 21st century. Policy brief no. 9, Center for
Policy Research, The Maxwell School. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University.
Burud, S. L., Aschbacher, P. R., & McCroskey, J. (1984). Employer-sup-
ported child care: Investing in human resources. Dover, MA: Auburn
House.
Celente, G. (1997). Trends 2000. New York: Warner Books.
Cherlin, A. (1998). By the numbers. New York Times Magazine. April 5.
Clarkenberg, M. (1998). The time-squeeze: Married couples' work-hours
patterns and preference. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Soci-
ology, Cornell University.
Culbreth, J. (1999). On the record. Working Mother, May 6.
Dunkerley, M. (1996). The jobless economy: Computer technology in the
world of work. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Duxbury, L., Higgins, C., & Lee, C. (1994). Work-family conflict: A com-
parison by gender, family type and perceived control. Journal of Family
Issues, 15, 449­466.
Dynerman, S. B., & Hayes, L. O. (1991). The best jobs in America for par-
ents. New York: Ballantine Books.
Eagle, B. W., Icenogle, M. L., Maes, J. D., & Miles, E. W. (1998). The im-
portance of employee demographic profiles for understanding
experiences of family interrole conflicts. The Journal of Social Psychol-
ogy, 138, 690­709.
England, P., & Kilbourne, B. (1990). Markets, marriages, and other mates:
The problem of power. In R. Friedland & A. F. Robertson (Eds.), Be-
yond the marketplace: Rethinking economy and society (pp. 163­188).
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Ezra, M., & Deckman, M. (1996). Balancing work and family responsibili-
ties: Flextime and child care in the federal government. Public
Administration Review, March/April, 174­179.
Ferber, M., & O'Farrell, B. (Eds.) (1991). Work and family: Policies for a
changing work force. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Foner, A. (1994). Endnote: The reach of an idea. In M. W. Riley, R. L.
Kahn, & A. Foner (Eds.), Age and structural lag (pp. 263­280). New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Friedan, B. (1991). The second stage. New York: Dell Publishing.
Frone, M. R., Russell, M., & Cooper, M. L. (1992). Prevalence of work-
family conflict: Are work and family boundaries asymmetrically per-
meable? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13, 723­729.
Frone, M. R., Yardley, J. K., & Markel, K. S. (1997). Developing and testing
an integrative model of the work­family interface. Journal of Voca-
tional Behavior, 50, 145­167.
Fuchs, V. R. (1982). Self-employed and labor force participation of older
males. Journal of Human Resources, 27, 339­357.
Galinsky, E., & Bond, J. T. (1996). Work and family: The experiences of
mothers and fathers in the U.S. labor force. In C. Costello & B. K.
300 The Gerontologist
Krimgold (Eds.), The American woman 1996­97: Women and work
(pp. 79­103). New York: W. W. Norton.
Galinsky, E., Friedman, D., & Hernandez, C. (1991). The corporate refer-
ence guide to work-family programs. New York: Families and Work
Institute.
Glass, J. L., & Estes, S. B. (1997). The family responsive workplace. Annual
Review of Sociology, 23, 289­313.
Goldscheider, F. K., & Waite, L. J. (1991). New families, no families? The
transformation of the American home. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.
Gonyea, J. G., & Googins, B. K. (1996). The restructuring of work and fam-
ily in the United States: A new challenge for American corporations. In
S. Lewis, & J. Lewis (Eds.), The work­family challenge (pp. 63­78).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Googins, B. K. (1991). Work/family conflicts: Private lives­public re-
sponses. New York: Auburn House.
Greenhaus, J. H. (1988). The intersection of work and family roles: Individ-
ual, interpersonal, and organizational issues. Journal of Social Behavior
and Personality, 3, 23­44.
Haas, L. (1992). Equal parenthood and social policy: A study of parental
leave in Sweden. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Hall, D. T. (1989). Promoting work/family balance: An organization-
change approach. Organizational Dynamics, 18, 5­19.
Hall, D. T., & Mirvis, P. H. (1995). The new career contract: Developing
the whole person at midlife and beyond. Journal of Vocational Behav-
ior, 47, 269­289.
Harriman, A. (1982). The work leisure trade-off: Reduced work time for
managers and professionals. New York: Praeger Publishers.
Helgesen, S. (1998). Everyday revolutionaries: Working women and the
transformation of American life. New York: Doubleday.
Henson, K. D. (1996). Just a temp. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.
Higgins, C., & Duxbury, L. (1994). Impact of life-cycle stage and gender on
the ability to balance work and family responsibilities. Family Rela-
tions, 43, 144­151.
Hinrichs, K., Roche, W., & Sirianni, C. (Eds.) (1991). Working time in tran-
sition. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Hochschild, A. (1997). The time bind: When work becomes home and
home becomes work. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Honeycutt, T. L., & Rosen, B. (1997). Family-friendly human resource pol-
icies, salary levels, and salient identity as predictors of organizational
attraction. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 52, 1­23.
Judge, T. A., Boudreau, J. W., & Bretz, R. D., Jr. (1994). Job and life atti-
tudes of male executives. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 767­782.
Kanter, R. M. (1977). Work and family in the United States. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Keith, P., & Schafer, R. (1980). Role strain and depression in two-job fami-
lies. Family Relations, 29, 483­488.
Kofodimos, J. (1993). Balancing act. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kossek, E. E., & Nichol, V. (1992). The effects of on-site child care on em-
ployee attitudes and performance. Personnel Psychology, 45, 485­
509.
Kuttner, R. (1997). Everything for sale: The virtues and limits of markets.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Lopata, H. Z., Barnewolt, D., & Miller, C. A. (1985). City women: Work,
jobs, occupations, careers (Vol. 2): New York: Praeger.
Loscocco, K. A. (1997). Gender and the work­family nexus among the
self-employed. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50, 204­226.
Marks, N. (1996). Caregiving across the lifespan: National prevalence and
predictors. Family Relations, 45, 27­36.
Marks, S. R. (1977). Multiple roles and role strain: Some notes on human
energy, time and commitments. American Sociological Review, 42,
921­936.
McKie, C. (1992). Part-time work in the North Atlantic triangle: The United
States, the United Kingdom and Canada. In B. D. Warme, K. L. P.
Lundy, & L. A. Lundy (Eds.), Working part time. (pp. 21­41) New York.
Praeger.
Menaghan, E. G., & Parcel, T. L. (1990). Parental employment and family
life: Research in the 1980's. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52,
1079­1098.
Milkie, M. A., & Peltola, P. (1999). Playing all the roles: Gender and the
work­family balancing act. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 61:
476­490.
Moen, P. (1989). Working parents: Transformations in gender roles and
public policies in Sweden. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Moen, P. (1992). Women's two roles. New York: Auburn House.
Moen, P. & Firebaugh, F. M. (1994). Family policies and effective families:
A life-course perspective. International Journal of Sociology and Social
Policy, 14, 29­52.
Moen, P., McClain, D. D., & Williams, R. M., Jr. (1989). Social integration
and longevity: An event history analysis of women's roles and resil-
ience. American Sociological Review, 54, 635­647.
Moen, P., Robinson, J., & Fields, V. (1994). Women's work and caregiving
roles: A life course approach. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences,
49, S175­S186.
Moss, P. (1996). Reconciling employment and family responsibilities: A
European perspective. In S. Lewis, & J. Lewis (Eds.), The work-family
challenge: Rethinking employment. (pp. 20­33). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Pleck, J. H. (1985). Working wives/working husbands. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Presser, H. (1989). Can we make time for children? The economy, work
schedules, and child care. Demography, 26, 523­543.
Ransom, C., Aschbacher, P. R., & Burud, S. (1989). The return in child care
investments. Personnel Administrator, 34, 54­58.
Reskin, B. F., & Padavic, I. (1994). Women and men at work. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Rifkin, J. (1995). The end of work: The decline of the global labor force
and the dawn of the post-market era. New York: Putnam.
Riley, M. W. (1998). On the significance of age in sociology. American So-
ciological Review, 52, 1­14.
Riley, M. W. (1992). Age, gender and the problem of structural lag. Speech
delivered to honor the opening of the Life Course Institute, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, April 27.
Riley, M. W. (1994). Aging and society: Past, present, and future. The Ger-
ontologist, 34, 436­446.
Riley, M. W. (1998). The hidden age revolution: Emergent integration of all
ages. Policy brief. Syracuse, NY: Center for Policy Research, Maxwell
School, Syracuse University.
Riley, M. W., Foner, A., & Waring, J. (1988). Sociology of age. In N. J.
Smelser (Ed.), Handbook of sociology (pp. 243­290). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Riley, M. W., & Loscocco, K. A. (1994). The changing structure of work
opportunities: Toward an age-integrated society. In R. P. Abeles, H. C.
Gift, & M. G. Ory (Eds.), Aging and the quality of life (pp. 235­251).
New York: Spring.
Riley, M. W., & Riley, J. W. (1994). Age integration and the lives of older
people. The Gerontologist, 34, 110­115.
Rosenfeld, R. A., & Bikelund, G. E. (1995). Women's part-time work: A cross-
national comparison. European Sociological Review, 11, 111­134.
Rothausen, T. J. (1994). Job satisfaction and the parent worker: The role of
flexibility and rewards. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 44, 317­336.
Schor, J. B. (1991). The overworked American: The unexpected decline of
leisure. New York: Basic Books.
Schor, J. B. (1998). The overspent American: Upscaling, downshifting and
the new consumer. New York: Basic Books.
Schwartz, F. N. (1989). Management women and the new facts of life.
Harvard Business Review, 67, 67­76.
Schwartz, F. N. (1992). Breaking with tradition: Women and work, the
new facts of life. New York: Warner Books.
Sekaran, U., & Hall, D. T. (1989). Asynchronism in dual-career and family
lineages. In M. B. Arthur, D. T. Hall, & B. Lawrence (Eds.), Handbook
of career theory (pp.159­180). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Siegel, C. (1990). The brave new world of child care. New Perspectives
Quarterly, Winter, 34­45.
Simon, R. W. (1992). Parental role strain, salience of parental identity and
gender difference in psychological distress. Journal of Health and So-
cial Behavior, 33, 25­35.
Stautberg, S. S. (1987). Status report: The corporation and trends in family
issues. Human Resources, 26, 277­290.
Thoits, P. A. (1986). Multiple identities: Examining gender and marital sta-
tus differences in distress. American Sociological Review, 51, 259­
272.
Thomas, L. T., & Ganster, D. C. (1995). Impact of family-supportive work
variables on work family conflict and strain: A control perspective.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 6­15.
Thompson, C. A., Beauvais, L. L., & Lyness, K. S. (1999). When work­fam-
ily benefits are not enough. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54, 392­
415.
U.S. Small Business Administration (USSBA) (1987). The state of small
business: A report of the president. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Voydanoff, P., & Donnelly, B. W. (1999). Multiple roles and psychological
distress: The intersection of the paid worker, spouse, and parent roles
with the role of the adult child. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 61,
725­738.
Weick, K. (1984). Small wins: Redefining the scale of social problems.
American Psychologist, 39, 29­31.
Wilson, W. J. (1996). When work disappears: The world of the new urban
poor. New York: Knopf.
301
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
Age Integration in Europe: Increasing or Decreasing?
Anne-Marie Guillemard, PhD
Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Paris V, Sorbonne, France.
I am grateful to John and Matilda Riley for inviting
me to take part in this panel on Age Integration which
is, in my opinion, a very burning issue. I am interested
in whether we are moving toward more age integra-
tion or toward more age discrimination. Are we enter-
ing a society for all ages, where age is no longer used
as a basis for barriers and discrimination among peo-
ple? Or is the future of society going to bring war
between age groups? My response to this question is
based on my current research activity which deals
with employment throughout the life course. My focus
is on the way in which European societies deal with
this issue: how they distribute work and nonwork
across age strata and across the life course.
I have to answer "both" to my earlier question on
whether the trend is toward more age integration or
discrimination. I see European societies as being
schizophrenic regarding age integration--they are
developing contradictory behaviors within differing
contexts of employment or social welfare.
1. When European societies contemplate employ-
ment, they view age discrimination as the only so-
lution to the problem of high unemployment.
Substituting younger people for aging wage earn-
ers at the workplace is the new norm in employ-
ment. Early labor force exit and negative discrimi-
nation against aging workers in employment has
become a common feature of European labor
markets. Thus workers, even in their forties, may
be deemed too old to be promoted or to be re-
trained. They are seen as wage earners without
any future at the workplace, although their life ex-
pectancy continues to increase and roughly half
of their life course still lies ahead of them.
But there is a paradox here, because age dis-
crimination in employment tends to break down
earlier chronological markers and age barriers. As a
result, distinctions between ages become blurred;
the life course is less predictable and more uncer-
tain. Moreover, there is a poor fit between individ-
ual expectations and structural opportunities. Some
aging workers complain about the few structural
opportunities that remain for them to maintain their
social usefulness. In response, more and more of
them engage in nonprofit activities in many places
throughout Europe. Most of these nonprofit ac-
tivities involve intergenerational relations cutting
across age barriers. This means that these aging
workers are denying the relevance of age barriers
and age segregation in their daily lives.
2. When European societies contemplate social ex-
penditures within the welfare state, particularly for
retirement pensions, they would like to postpone
the retirement age. Therefore, in an effort to re-
balance the financial equilibrium of pensions, all
pension reforms implemented in Europe have tried
to increase the length of the work life and post-
pone retirement age. For example, the expansion
of flexible retirement (in the case of the British
project of "a retirement decade") may be seen as
an attempt to delay the exit from the labor market
for aging wage earners. The mushrooming of flexi-
ble or gradual retirement schemes all over Europe
is another example of efforts to retain aging work-
ers in the labor market, even as part-time workers.
3. Meanwhile, one can observe a few new develop-
ments in age-integrated structures. Transitions
from education to work as well as from work to
retirement are becoming increasingly unclear. A
new flexible and destandardized life course is ap-
pearing as chronological age loses ground as a
marker. Some new public employment policies
implemented in Europe tend in this direction and
address all ages.
A good example is training programs for all ages.
For a long time, continuing education programs tar-
getted wage earners under 40 years old. Now, a spe-
cial effort has been made to include aging wage
earners beyond their forties and to stop age discrimi-
nation in training altogether.
In France, an employment policy implemented in
1994 aims at increasing work flexibility and reducing
the time that wage-earners of all ages spend working.
The "Time Savings Account" is a major innova-
tion. Through agreements worked out inside firms, it
provides for turning the right to paid leaves of ab-
sence into a type of capital for employees, regardless
of age. It has three objectives. It satisfies an employee
demand for being able to save such leaves so that,
during certain periods, the time thus saved can serve
to finance long absences for sabbaticals, parental
leave, etc. It can also serve to distribute productivity
gains in the form of remunerated free time. Further-
more, it enables firms to manage leaves taken at the
end of careers by employees nearing retirement. Un-
der this scheme, employees are paid, as a function of
their wages, for leaves at least six months long. This
new "Time Savings Account" has inspired a recent
report for the European Commission: A. Supiot's Au-
delà de l'emploi. Transformations du travail et deve-
302 The Gerontologist
nir du droit du travail en Europe (Supiot, 1999). To
cope with the evolving labor market and the new
flexible life course as it emerges, this report proposes
developing more pliant welfare arrangements around
the principle of "drawing social entitlements." Such
entitlements tend to be age-neutral and cut across the
bounds of the threefold organization of the life-
course. They would generalize the Time Savings Ac-
count principle to all welfare programs, thus en-
abling a new, voluntary and flexible, distribution of
paid periods of work and of nonwork over the life-
course. Time would no longer be distributed owing
to one's age-group or position in the life-course, but
access to these entitlements would be open to all ages.
Time would no longer be remunerated by specific pro-
grams depending on whether it was spent on a leave
of absence for raising children (parental leave), fur-
thering one's education or training, or taking early re-
tirement or gradual retirement. A single welfare policy
would meet all these needs in a society where age
would become irrelevant as the central criterion for al-
locating "social rights" and welfare benefits.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Anne-Marie Guillemard, Ministere de l'Ed-
ucation Nationale, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, 54
Boulevard Raspail, 75006 Paris, France.
Reference
Supiot, A. (1999). Au-delà de l'emploi. Transformations du travail et deve-
nir du droit du travail en Europe [Beyond employment. Conversations
of work and work reform in Europe]. Paris: Flammarion.
Conflicting Trends in The Netherlands
Jan Baars, PhD
Department of Philosophy, Tilburg University, The Netherlands.
The Netherlands, at first sight, may seem to be a very
age-integrated society. Retirees study together with
younger students at the universities, and their instructors
are often much younger than they are. This phenome-
non of age integration in the domain of education has
appeared only in the past decade. When I was a student
in the 1970s, the few older students at the university
tended to be ex-priests who wanted to become social
workers or psychotherapists. At that time I never en-
countered pensioners who were studying at a regular
university, but now this has become quite common. Fur-
ther, both younger students and pensioners often engage
in work in addition to their other activities. Students
work part time to earn extra income, and pensioners are
economically active in such ways as redecorating or
painting houses, bookkeeping, or gardening.
Below the surface, however, one can see important
age-related dividing lines. For students, these dividing
lines are dictated by the entrance and exit codes operat-
ing in the central economic domain of official labor.
Young students must move quickly through university
programs (which are much shorter now than they were
10 years ago) in order to keep their grants and to be
"young enough" to start careers in such areas as sci-
ence, economics, or advocacy. In contrast, older stu-
dents are able to study at a more leisurely pace, either at
the university if they have good pensions, or in inexpen-
sive courses specifically organized for older people.
Gray Work: An Area of Age Integration
The unofficial jobs that students often work at are
referred to as "gray jobs." For example, students may
work in a bar, where they avoid paying taxes and do
not receive proper insurance. Students prefer this
type of secretive work because if they were officially
paid, some amount of their pay would be deducted
from their grants. Retired people often engage in the
same kinds of gray work, because official payment
would be heavily taxed or deducted from their pen-
sions. There is, in fact, a huge area of gray work that is
age integrated, where we find not only students and
retirees, but adults of all ages who are either unem-
ployed or working for extra income. It is worth noting
that the gray economy reflects social inequality: Retir-
ees who study at the university are typically not the re-
tirees who have gray jobs. It is difficult to estimate the
extent of this gray economy; some specialists have set
it at 3% of gross national product, which for a small
country like The Netherlands would be around 10 bil-
lion U.S. dollars. In other countries (e.g., those in East-
ern Europe) the importance of this age-integrated area
of gray work is certainly much larger.
Volunteer Activities: Another Area of Age Integration
Many older people join women of all ages in volun-
teer activities. In the past, individuals often were not al-
lowed to remain in official leadership positions of vol-
unteer organizations after they reached age 65 or 70.
But this type of age discrimination is declining. The
Netherlands has a government-sponsored National Bu-
reau Against Age Discrimination (of which I am a
member of the advisory board), which has helped to
set this topic on the national agenda. As a result, age
restrictions on roles of volunteers have become less
303
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
common. But results of the battle against age discrimi-
nation stop at the borders of the central economic do-
main. In other words, age integration is an aspect of so-
cial integration, not of system integration (Baars &
Thomese, 1994; Habermas, 19841987).
Official Work: An Area of Continuing
Age Segregation
In the central sector of the economy, however,
there is a partial reversal of the structural lag which,
according to the Rileys, (see pp. 266­270, this issue)
presses for age integration. Here the "dynamism of
structural change," rather than lagging behind the
"dynamism of human aging," is now outpacing it, as
the economy no longer needs the same input of labor
as before. As shown in the excellent comparative
study, Time for Retirement, by my copanelists Martin
Kohli and Anne Marie Guillemard (Kohli, Rein,
Guillemard, & Van Gunsteren, 1991), over a long
period of time the large number of exiting older
workers was not compensated for by employment of
young people. A form of economic growth that was
not translated into a need for more workers ("jobless
growth") had followed the shrinking economy of the
recession years. More recently, however, although
some concern has been expressed over labor short-
ages, this has not meant a general shortage of work-
ers. Rather, the labor shortage involves only workers
with specific qualifications. The demand for workers
with specific qualifications may, nevertheless, under-
mine age segregation in the central economic sector
in some limited ways. There was a very minor, but
interesting, indication of this when older computer
programmers were invited back to service because
they knew how to change the computer programs re-
sponsible for the Millennium problem.
Official Work: An Area of Age Discrimination
Although the extreme exit of older workers from
the labor force was not regulated by the pension sys-
tems, these early retirees were nevertheless regarded
as having become "old." It is astonishing to see how
the definition of becoming "old," in much gerontolog-
ical research, in social policy reports, and in many or-
ganizations of the aged, has dropped in a short time
from age 65 to 55 or even 50 years. A cultural pattern,
originating in the early phases of the retirement sys-
tems, defined people as old when they no longer
worked (which usually meant that they could not do
heavy physical work anymore). But this pattern has
continued to the present so that people who are
amazingly fit and quite young, especially in light of
increasing life expectancy, are referred to as "old" be-
cause they have retired. People are now likely to be
defined as "older workers" when they have reached
the age of 45 years. Here the separation of "normal"
adults from "older" adults takes on ironic proportions:
20 years growing up, 25 years as a normal adult, and
from age 45 until 100 or more as "old."
From these examples we conclude that "becoming
old" appears to be defined by a changing relationship to
the labor market. The cultural tradition has emphasized
the importance ("youthful normalcy") of formal work,
with age as a dependent variable. But chronological
age then is often used as an "independent" variable to
legitimate the process that gave it its meaning. The para-
doxical result is that as people live longer and are
healthier, they are defined as "old" at younger ages than
before because they are not working anymore. I have
called this the "paradox of the younger elderly." Victims
of this paradox are, for instance, women in their forties
who want to reenter the labor market after educating
their children, but who are regarded as "too old."
Recently we have seen a slight increase in labor
force participation rates for those aged 55­59. Be-
tween 1994 and 1997, the participation rate for men
in this age category rose from 55% to 60%, and for
women the increase was from 20% to 24%. These
small increases in labor force participation may be
partly due to recently developed flexible retirement
schemes, but they do not reflect any extension of the
working life beyond the traditional retirement age of
65. It is theoretically possible to continue working
until 65, but then all flexibility ends. In The Nether-
lands, retirement is compulsory in all public sectors
(civil servants, etc.) and in all formally organized and
collectively negotiated work situations.
In sum, we are confronted with a central economic
domain that still patterns the life course because, in
it, age is highly relevant. A new dynamic of age inte-
gration is evident, however, in more peripheral areas.
Seen in the context of rising longevity, official work is
taking on a less important place in life. Official work-
ing hours and years of working are gradually being
reduced. But these changes affect people differently.
There is one segment of people who, after obtaining
a higher education and working for 30 years in inter-
esting jobs (which absorb much more than the offi-
cially stated amount of time during this period) have
acquired good pensions and other cultural assets that
prepare them for a long period of interesting retire-
ment. In contrast, there is another large group of peo-
ple who arrive at old age with only a minimum state
pension because they never had regular jobs over
their work lives. These less privileged people are
forced to continue to work in gray jobs in later life. It
appears that important social problems are (and will
be) created through the complex configurations of
changing economic conditions that shape the form
and content of work vis-à-vis the changing dynamics
of the life course.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Professor Jan Baars, PhD, Department of
Philosophy, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The
Netherlands. E-mail: jbaars@kub.nl
References
Baars, J., & Thomese, F. (1994). Communes of elderly people: Between in-
dependence and colonization. Journal of Aging Studies, 8, 341­356.
Habermas, J. (19841987). The theory of communicative action (2 vols.).
London: Heinemann.
Kohli, M., Rein, M., Guillemard, A.-M., & Van Gunsteren, H. (Eds.).
(1991). Time for retirement: Comparative studies of early exit from the
labour force. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
304 The Gerontologist
Public Policy and the Construction of Old Age in Europe
Alan Walker, DLitt
Department of Sociological Studies, The University of Sheffield, England.
The central theme of this brief contribution is that
public policy has played (and continues to do so) a
major role in determining the meaning of old age
and, therefore, the extent of age integration and seg-
regation. Old age has been constructed and recon-
structed by social and economic policies and, for
their part, older people have been expected to adjust
to the reification of age into convenient social cate-
gories for the purpose of resource distribution and ra-
tioning; to the institutions of the welfare state set up
to "manage" aging (the "aging enterprise"); and to the
changing prescriptions of policy makers and profes-
sionals charged with their care. This is not to suggest
that older people are the simple creatures of policy
but, rather, that policy is a key component of an age
structuration that leaves scope for active agency in
the interpretation and reproduction of social reality.
Older people interact with their environment in a re-
flexive way to create their own social reality. Futher-
more, this policy context is set not only at the local
and national levels but also by global agencies.
I will draw on European experience, specifically,
the 15 Member States of the European Union (EU), to
illustrate the key role of policy in determining the
changing meaning and significance of age barriers
and, therefore, the scope for age integration.
Constructing and Reconstructing the Meaning of
Old Age
It is possible to distinguish three distinct phases in
the postwar European evolution of social policy with
regard to older people (Guillemard, 1983).
Old Age as a Social Problem: 1940s­Early 1970s
In the years following World War II, aging became
identified as a social problem. National pension sys-
tems were put in place and/or consolidated during
this period, and social expenditure rose rapidly in
what proved to be the heyday of the welfare state. Of
course, the origins of social policy in the field of pen-
sions predate this period by more than 50 years: Bis-
marck's system of worker insurance in Germany in
1889 and the first old-age pensions in the United
Kingdom (UK) in 1908 and in France in 1910. How-
ever, universal coverage was achieved in this period,
and there is no mistaking the proliferation of social
policy measures. In the period 1960­1975 the in-
crease in pension expenditure in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
countries accounted for one quarter of the rise in the
share of public expenditure in total expenditure. In
France it was more than one third, in Germany just
under one fifth, and, in the UK, around one seventh
(OECD, 1988). This reinforces the conclusion of Pam-
pel, Williamson, and Stryker (1990, p. 547) that there
are "multiple paths to higher pension spending." Inci-
dentally, in the period 1960­1975, pension spending
in the United States contributed just over one third of
the growth in the size of the public sector.
The main goals of public policy in this period
were to provide for income security in old age and,
in doing so, to ensure the efficient transition of older
workers from employment to retirement. The early
postwar period was one of full employment; indeed,
in the early 1950s in the UK a National Advisory
Committee on the Employment of Older Men and
Women was formed to encourage older people to re-
main in the labor market (Phillipson, 1982). While
full employment lasted, there was some resistance to
the assumptions of neoclassical economics and sci-
entific management theories concerning declining
productivity in older age (Taylor, 1947). Thus, the
main focus of public policy was on those who had
left the labor market. This focus was determined
largely by economic management and policy be-
cause this group was, in effect, defined as "externali-
ties" by the macro-economic policy system. Public
pensions were regarded as an appropriate way of
socializing the costs of retirement as well as assisting
industry to rejuvenate the workforce (Graebner, 1980).
This was an important element of the postwar settle-
ment between Keynesian economics and Beveridge-
style (i.e., liberal) social policy: It was intended that
economic growth would generate sufficient resources
for universal pension provision.
The establishment of public pension systems and,
more importantly, their accompanying retirement
conditions encouraged the rapid spread of fixed age
retirement. Thus, in policy terms, old age came to be
uniquely associated with retirement ages. In other
words, old age was objectified as retirement age
(Graebner, 1980; Townsend, 1981; Walker, 1980).
What are the consequences of the institutionalization
of age-related retirement? There are five key points.
In the first place, the economic dependency of
older people has been enlarged substantially. One
hundred years ago in the UK, some two thirds of the
male population aged 65 and over were economi-
cally active (in employment or seeking it); today it is
only 7%. Older people were not helpless pawns in
305
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
this social definition of old age. On the contrary, in-
dividually and collectively, workers called for retire-
ment and public pensions. But the creation of a fixed
age barrier in European pension systems has led to
widespread economic dependency.
Second, age-barrier retirement has been the main
wellspring of age discrimination in employment, so-
cial security, and in wider social relations (Bytheway,
1995; McEwan, 1990). It has not been the sole cause
of age discrimination, but it has encouraged the view
that, past a certain age, an individual's economic and
social worth is diminished.
Third, as a corollary to retirement, it has been ac-
cepted that the income needs of older people are
lower than those of the "economically active." Typi-
cally, public pensions are set at rates below and
sometimes considerably below average earnings and,
even when occupational pensions are included and
idealized projections made, some leading EU coun-
tries still have quite low replacement ratios: 69% in
Germany and 64% in the UK, for example (Walker,
Guillemard, & Alber, 1993).
Fourth, age-barrier retirement and these foregoing
factors have encouraged the view that older people
are not just a social problem but an economic bur-
den as well. Thus, in this early postwar phase there
were occasional warnings--for example, from the
United Nations in 1954--about the "burden" of pop-
ulation aging (Walker, 1990). This approach to aging
is best exemplified in the old age dependency ratio,
which crudely expresses a ratio between those over
pension age and younger adults and, thereby, objec-
tifies the assumption that economic dependency
must be associated with aging. Such calculations are
used frequently in European policy discourse in this
field, despite their many flaws.
Fifth, with regard to health and social services pol-
icy and practice, it was this first phase that saw the
major expansion of these services and their profes-
sionalization. Because policy makers had come to re-
gard older people as largely dependent and passive
objects, it is not surprising that the professional and
institutional structures of the health and social ser-
vices also tended to reflect this view: For example,
some forms of education and training encouraged
professionals to regard themselves as experts operat-
ing autonomously. Thus, the expansion of health and
social services in this period was a two-sided coin: It
enhanced the welfare of older people but it was de-
livered often in ways that reinforced their depen-
dency and powerlessness. The professionalization of
old age in the health and social services, therefore, is
an important component of age segregation.
Old Age as the Solution to One Economic Problem
and the Cause of Another: Mid 1970s­Late 1980s
This was actually a transitional phase, stretching
from the origins of the fiscal crises in the mid-1970s
to the late 1980s. During this relatively short space of
time the social meaning of aging was reconstructed
along two dimensions.
First, there was a massive fall in economic activity
in later life throughout the EU and, indeed, all indus-
trial countries with the exceptions of Sweden and
Japan (Kohli, Rein, Guillemard, & Van Gunsteren,
1991). The decline in activity is most marked among
those aged 65 and over and those aged 60­64, but is
also clear in the age group 55­59. In most EU coun-
tries, working after the age of 65 has been eradicated.
The position of older women is harder to disentangle
from the cohort effect of rising rates of participation
among younger women, but it does appear that a
similar decline has taken place (Walker et al., 1993).
The main factors explaining this decline in Europe
are demand related, particularly the collapse of em-
ployment in the mid-1970s and early 1980s. My own
research on early retirement following redundancy in
the Sheffield steel industry shows two distinct paths be-
ing followed: (a) there were those who, faced with re-
dundancy, chose early retirement as a preferable op-
tion to unemployment; (b) on the other hand, there
were those who were effectively coerced into it by a
hostile labor market. Thus, early retirement was, for the
first group, a welcome release from employment and,
for the second group, a refuge from an inhospitable la-
bor market. The key explanatory factors in this social
division were age (proximity to pension age) and in-
come level (Westergaard, Noble, & Walker, 1989).
Demand-related factors were the main causes of
the rise of early retirement, and one of these main
factors was public policy. During this period there was
a proliferation of employment and pension measures
designed to encourage early retirement. Examples in-
clude the Job Release Scheme in the UK and prere-
tirement benefits in Denmark and Germany (Walker
et al., 1993).
During this transitional phase, the growth of early
retirement has reconstructed old age from a simple
age-related status with a single lower entry point into
a much broader category that stretches from age 50
to death. This has necessitated the widespread func-
tional separation of the third (50­74) and fourth
(75) ages, the young-old and old-old, a distinction
that first appeared in France in the 1960s. It has also
meant, as Guillemard (1993) has shown, that public
pension systems are no longer the key regulators of
retirement. The traditional pattern of labor force exit
at pension age has become a minority one; for exam-
ple, in Germany (former FDR) and the UK, only
about one third of entrants to the public pension sys-
tem come directly from employment.
Another important consequence of the unchecked
growth of early retirement from the labor force is that
it has reinforced the devaluation of older people in
the labor market. The downward redefinition of ag-
ing has had consequences for the ways that employ-
ers perceive older workers and, in turn, the chances
they offer them for reemployment. Indeed, there is a
growing body of evidence in different EU countries to
show that older adults are frequently discriminated
against with regard to job recruitment, promotions,
and training (Drury, 1993, 1997; Walker, 1997). This
is despite the fact that age is not a good proxy for the
306 The Gerontologist
ability to work and learn; therefore, discrimination is
not only unjust but wasteful of economic capacity
and potential.
The only EU-wide survey evidence on this topic
comes from 1992 (Walker, 1993). We asked the gen-
eral public in each country whether or not older
workers are discriminated against with regard to job
recruitment and other aspects of employment. A re-
markably high proportion--four out of five for the EU
as a whole--said that such discrimination does exist
with regard to recruitment. Moreover, there was
hardly any difference based on the age of respon-
dents: All age groups believed that discrimination
takes place against older workers (Walker, 1993).
During this second phase the social meaning of
aging was transformed from its long association with
pension ages to labor market criteria such as employ-
ability. Public policy, particularly in the employment
sphere, was one of the main engines driving this
change. But while encouraging early retirement was
seen as a solution to unemployment (although the
policy does not seem to have been very effective),
aging also came to be seen as an economic problem
in its own right. From the late 1970s onward, there
has been mounting concern on the part of national
governments about the economic consequences of
population aging. Forward projections of depen-
dency ratios have been used to paint a pessimistic
picture of the socioeconomic implications of aging.
Sometimes these border on the alarmist, as these
quotations show.
Under existing regulations the evolution of public
pension schemes is likely to put a heavy and increas-
ing burden on the working population in coming
decades. Such a financial strain may put intergenera-
tional solidarity--a concept on which all public re-
tirement provisions are based--at risk. (OECD, 1988)
If no action is taken to deal with the incipient crisis
of population aging, then it seems certain that west-
ern societies will experience major social and eco-
nomic dislocation, and they may experience this rel-
atively soon. (Johnson, Conrad, & Thomson, 1989)
The question as to why international agencies and
European governments should adopt an avowedly
pessimistic stance toward the societal implications of
population aging takes us beyond the scope of this
discussion. What it illustrates is that neoclassical as-
sumptions about the "burden" of aging held sway in
national and international policy arenas (Walker,
1990). In other words, the theory of old age that
dominated public policy in this period was extremely
pessimistic, economically.
The Late 1980s Onward--Integration or Segregation
of Older People?
The transition from the second to the third phase
of aging policy development was marked by the ter-
mination, in the late 1980s, of some of the main
mechanisms for early retirement. One of the first EU
countries to act was France, in 1986, when early re-
tirement contracts were abolished. Soon after, similar
actions were taken in Belgium, Germany, and the
UK. However, the early retirement trend has devel-
oped its own momentum and has become institution-
alized in the labor market for the reasons outlined
above. Although the transition has happened, Euro-
pean societies are only just on the threshold of this
third phase and, therefore, the future of aging and
public policy is a matter of speculation. The future
appears to offer two separate scenarios.
The first possibility is that aging will be regarded as
a growing "burden" to society. In other words, ageing
would be constituted, in policy terms, as an eco-
nomic burden, and national governments would at-
tempt to reduce its economic cost in the form of pen-
sions and health and social services. There is no
doubt that in several leading EU countries the cost of
pensions and long-term care is a major political is-
sue. Most of them have already taken action to limit
costs. In the pensions field the most favored policy is
an increase in retirement ages. For example, both
Germany and the UK are increasing their retirement
ages over the next decade.
This "public burden of aging" scenario would rein-
force the continuous thread in postwar policy dis-
course that associates aging with inevitable decline,
decrescence, and unproductiveness. According to this
account, the future of old age would be a bleak one--
particularly for those heavily reliant on the welfare
state. In addition, the future of aging societies would
be equally bleak because, if intergenerational solidar-
ity is undermined by the policies that flow from the
public burden orientation (such as the privatization of
pensions and health and social care), this would have
ramifications far beyond welfare policies.
The alternative path leads to active aging and age
integration. Looking toward this future, there are
three interlinked sets of developments suggesting that
age may be reconstructed, or perhaps deconstructed,
in a new post-modern form (Walker, 1996).
First, in the labor market, there are clear signs of
change in the perceptions of aging on the part of
some European employers. There are a growing
number of private companies in France, Germany,
Sweden, and the UK that are adopting different em-
ployment practices to those followed by the majority.
Examples include the introduction of more flexible
employment and retirement policies, special recruit-
ment campaigns targeted on older workers and, per-
haps most importantly, new holistic approaches to
employment and lifelong training, in which aging is
a key factor built into considerations of job plan-
ning and design. Although these policies have been
adopted by only a small minority of employers so far,
there are indications to suggest the start of a trend.
Moreover, some EU governments have been attempt-
ing to encourage flexibility in the form of partial re-
tirement--although with little success so far.
Second, in the field of health and social services
there are signs, in some EU countries, of a swing
away from the traditional paternalism of service pro-
307
Vol. 40, No. 3, 2000
viders toward more active conceptions of old age.
Over the last decade there has been a wide range of
service innovations in the EU countries, despite fund-
ing shortages. Although traditional forms of service
provision remain dominant and pluralistic service in-
novation has been haphazard, there are sufficient in-
dications of change to suggest that practitioners are
beginning to face up to the challenges of involving
older users of services in key decisions about the pro-
vision of their care. Some are developing new strate-
gies designed to empower older people to some
extent, and professional attitudes and values are be-
ginning to encourage cooperation and partnership
with older service users. In short, what appears to be
a gradual revolution is underway in the approach to
aging taken by some social service agencies. If this
change is successful on a large scale, it may trans-
form the meaning of aging in this sphere from its as-
sociation with passivity and dependency to one con-
cerned with activity and interdependence. This sort
of development would represent a profound shift in
the social status of older people.
Third, older Europeans themselves are beginning
to seize the initiative and may not be prepared to
wait for the pronouncements of experts on how the
aging process should be interpreted. A growing num-
ber are actively demonstrating the potential for a new
meaning to be applied to aging. Thus, in recent
years, new political groupings composed of older
people have been formed, or existing ones have
gained in strength, including the creation of pension-
ers' political parties. In Germany a "gray party" was
formed in 1989 to champion senior citizens' inter-
ests. Belgium saw the founding of a pensioners' party
in 1990; Italy has one and so does Portugal. There is
a radical grassroots movement of older people in
Denmark, an organization called Ageing Differently
in The Netherlands (designed to campaign for alter-
native perceptions of old age) and, in the UK, the Na-
tional Pensioners' Convention--a grassroots organi-
zation with up to 2 million members. The growth of
self-advocacy movements among older people has
been echoed in some countries by the creation of lo-
cal or national advisory councils comprising older
people (Walker & Naegele, 1999). These develop-
ments are finding support among the general public:
More than four out of five EU citizens think that older
people should stand up more actively for their rights
(Walker, 1993). There are indications in such evi-
dence that the public thinks that aging should not be
a simple matter of adjustment and peaceful retire-
ment but that older people should be fully integrated
citizens.
Together, these three developments suggest that,
in the next century, the meaning of old age may be
reconstructed into a more active form--where "activ-
ity" includes not only economic activity in the form
of paid employment, but also a wide range of formal,
quasiformal, and informal activities that are produc-
tive in social, political, and economic terms. To the
extent that such activities are economically produc-
tive they would also assist in quelling the fears of pol-
iticians concerning the costs of aging societies. On
the negative side, however, it is likely that the decon-
struction of the later life course, in the absence of
supportive social policies, would leave older people
vulnerable, without rights to social protection and
with access only to minimum social assistance level
benefits and services.
Policy Is Personal
This periodization of postwar Europe indicates
the contribution of both macropolicies and those
concerned with service provision in encouraging
the social integration or segregation of older people.
For the most part this analysis has been concerned
with integration in the major formal or material struc-
tures of society such as the labor market and wel-
fare institutions. What about the issue of integration
in the informal relationships of family, friends, and
neighbors?
Here the European evidence shows continuing
high levels of social integration between age groups,
for example, with regard to social contact or inter-
generational solidarity. Within families women can
be demonstrated to be the main facilitators of age in-
tegration. But here too policy plays a critical role: For
example, by rationing social care the state ensures
the continuing primacy of family care (in all but the
Scandinavian countries). However, while this policy
successfully maintained age integration (if not gender
integration) in the modern era, the combination of
changes in family structure and increased longevity
implies that it will no longer suffice. Indeed, if addi-
tional social support is not provided, particularly in
the southern states of Europe, this policy is likely to
increase age segregation. In other words, policy may
enhance the integration of older people in informal
relationships or it may jeopardize it.
Conclusion
This essay has concentrated on the role of social
policies, at both macro and micro levels, in the con-
struction of age in postwar Europe. Thus, the in-
creased age structuration and the segregation of old
age experienced in the EU (especially in the northern
countries) was a function of social policy. However,
the outcomes of these policies were not always fore-
seen by their sponsors. The future offers possibilities
for either greater age segregation or integration.
Acknowledgment
Address correspondence to Dr. Alan Walker, Department of Sociological
Studies, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TU, United Kingdom. E-mail:
a.c.walker@sheffield.ac.uk
References
Bytheway, B. (1995). Ageism. Buckingham, England: Open University
Press.
Drury, E. (Ed.). (1993). Age discrimination against older workers in the Eu-
ropean community. London: Eurolink Age.
Drury, E. (Ed.). (1997). Public policy options to assist older workers. Lon-
don: Eurolink Age.
308 The Gerontologist
Graebner, W. (1980). A history of retirement. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Guillemard, A. M. (Ed.). (1983). Old age and the welfare state. London:
Sage.
Guillemard, A. M. (1993). Older workers and the labour market. In A.
Walker, J. Alber, & A. M. Guillermard (Eds.), Older people in Europe:
Social and economic policies (pp. 35­51), Brussels, Belgium: Commis-
sion of the European Communities.
Johnson, P., Conrad, C., & Thomson, D. (Eds.). (1989). Workers versus
pensioners: Intergenerational justice in an aging world, Manchester,
UK: Manchester University Press.
Kohli, M., Rein, M., Guillemard, A. M., & Van Gunsteren, H. (Eds). (1991).
Time for retirement: Comparative studies of early exit from the labour
force. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McEwan, E. (Ed.). (1990). Age: The unrecognized discrimination. London:
ACE Books.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
(1988). Reforming public pensions. Paris: OECD.
Pampel, F., Williamson, J., & Stryker, R. (1990). Class context and pension
response to demographic structure in advanced industrial democra-
cies. Social Problems, 37, 535­550.
Phillipson, C. (1982). Capitalism and the construction of old age. London:
Macmillan.
Taylor, F. W. (1947). Scientific management. New York: Harper.
Townsend, P. (1981). The structured dependency of the elderly: The cre-
ation of social policy in the twentieth century. Ageing and Society, 1,
5­28.
Walker, A. (1980). The social creation of poverty and dependency in old
age. Journal of Social Policy, 9, 49­75.
Walker, A. (1990). The economic "Burden" of ageing and the prospect of
intergenerational conflict. Ageing and Society, 10, 377­396.
Walker, A. (1993). Age and attitudes: Main results from a Eurobarometer
survey, Brussels, Belgium: Commission of the European Communities.
Walker, A. (Ed.). (1996). The new generational contract. London: UCL
Press.
Walker, A. (1997). Combating age barriers in employment. Luxembourg:
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Walker, A., Guillemard, A. M., & Alber, J. (1993). Older people in Europe:
Social and economic policies. Brussels: Commission of the European
Communities.
Walker, A., & Naegle, G. (Eds.). (1999). The politics of old age in Europe.
Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
Westergaard, J., Noble, I., & Walker, A. (1989). After redundancy. Oxford,
England: Polity Press.
Forum Received May 13, 1999
Forum Accepted December 28, 1999
Decision Editor: Vernon L. Greene, PhD
