Copyright 1999 by
The Cerontological Society of America
The Gerontologist
Vol. 39, No. 3, 261 -270
What are the most common themes of conflict between aging parents and their adult
children? Six types emerged in a qualitative analysis of Longitudinal Study of
Generations survey data: conflicts over (1) communication and interaction style; (2) habits
and lifestyle choices; (3) child-rearing practices and values; (4) politics, religion,
and ideology; (5) work habits and orientations; and (6) household standards or
maintenance. There were generational differences: parents most often listed
conflicts over habits and lifestyle choices, whereas children cited communication and
interaction style. These results suggest a new agenda for gerontological research:
intergenerational conflict in the context of solidarity within aging families.
Key words: Intergenerational relationships, Parent-child conflict,
Aging parents, Middle-aged issues
Types of Conflicts and Tensions Between
Older Parents and Adult Children
Edward J. Clarke, PhD,1 Mar Preston, MA,2 Jo Raksin, BA,2
and Vern L. Bengtson, PhD3
What are the principal themes of conflict between
aging parents and their adult children? Over the past
decade many studies have advanced our knowledge
concerning cross-generational cohesion, solidarity, and
exchanges of support in aging families; however, little
research has focused to date on conflicts in these re-
lationships. We know that conflict, as well as solidar-
ity, is part of any intergenerational relationship over
time (Bengtson, Rosenthal, & Burton, 1995), and that
conflict may become a dominant theme of some ag-
ing families (Kuypers & Bengtson, 1990; Preston, Gardner,
Royal, & Bengtson, 1997). The purpose of this study
is to explore the dimensions of conflict in older par-
ent-adult child relationships and to develop a typol-
ogy of conflict issues from reports of both generations.
Our work, based on a community-based, nonclinical
sample, addresses two issues: (1) What are the central
types of conflict reported between aging parents and
midlife children? (2) Are there differences between
older and younger generations in the types of con-
flicts reported?
Background of the Problem
Research on later-life family relationships has not
adequately addressed questions about conflicts for
This research has been funded by the National Institute on Aging (grant
#RO1AG07977). We want to thank Drs. Jared Jobe and Ronald Abeles
of NIA for their support of the Longitudinal Study of Generations project
over many years. Dr. Roseann Giarrusso is Project Director of the LSOG;
she has been instrumental in providing support and encouragement for
this study over time. We want also to thank Linda Hall and Deborah
Weisberg for technical contributions to this article.
California State University, Los Angeles.
2University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
3Address correspondence to Vern L. Bengtson, PhD, AARP/University
Professor of Gerontology, Professor of Sociology, University of Southern
California, Andrus Gerontology Center, 3715 McClintock Avenue, Los Angeles,
CA 90089-0191. E-mail: bengtson@rcf.usc.edu
several reasons. First, conflicts in later-life families are
often perceived as relatively unimportant, particularly
when compared to levels of conflict reported earlier
in the family life course (between teenaged children
and parents, for example). Related to this is the fact
that parents' reports of their relationships with their
children tend to be more positive than their children's
reports at all stages of the life course, as reflected in
the "intergenerational stake" hypothesis (Bengtson &
Kuypers, 1971; Giarrusso, Stallings, & Bengtson, 1995;
Hagestad, 1987). Almost 30 years ago, Winch (1971)
hypothesized a life course trajectory of family rela-
tionships in which conflict in families is highest during
the adolescent years followed by more "sentimentally
colored" relationships in the later years. Even in clini-
cal settings, where the therapeutic relationship encour-
ages candid disclosure, there seems to be consider-
able reluctance from older parents to report areas of
conflict with their children (Mancini & Blieszner, 1989).
A second reason that research on conflict in aging
families remains underdeveloped concerns concept-
ual and operational difficulties: What is conflict, and
how can it be measured or evaluated? For example,
Straus (1979) notes that conflict has been used to
describe three different phenomena in analyses of
family interaction and violence: (1) the collision of in-
dividuals' agendas and interests; (2) individuals' tac-
tics or responses to conflicts of interest; and (3) hostil-
ity toward others. Without clear specification of the
construct, investigations into conflict in older parent-
adult child relationships may obscure rather than illu-
minate relational issues.
Third, most research on conflict in parent-child re-
lationships takes a quantitative approach--document-
ing frequency, intensity, or duration of conflict--which
may mask the phenomenological, qualitative aspects
of relationship conflict. For example, the Conflict
Vol. 39, No. 3, 1999 261
Tactics Scale (CTS), developed by Straus (1979) as a
measure of intrafamily violence, is the most widely
used measure of conflict within families. The CTS and
similar survey measures have provided significant in-
sights into the intensity of conflict between young or
adolescent children and their parents--from low to
high on a unidimensional scale--and how individuals
within these families respond. However, this approach
leaves unexamined the issues around which conflict
occurs, how various issues affect relationship quality,
or how such issues might predict intensity or duration
of conflict.
What seems lacking to date in research on families
and aging is a clear classification scheme regarding
types or issues of family conflicts. Without such a
classification scheme to direct investigations, system-
atic knowledge development will be difficult.
In family studies involving adolescents and their
parents, conflict has most often been used either as
an explanatory variable or as the outcome of family
interaction. As a result, family conflict is most frequently
conceptualized as a unidimensional construct--con-
flict measured as magnitude, from low to high on some
scale. This approach leaves the dimensions or themes
of conflict unexplored. A few researchers have docu-
mented various components of conflict, and have in-
vestigated multiple domains of conflict issues in par-
ent-adolescent relationships (Calambos & Almeida,
1992; Montemayor, 1983; Papini & Sebby, 1988; Sme-
tana, 1989). Inquiries into antecedents of child-parent
relationships have also included: satisfaction with
others' enactment of family roles (Johnson, 1978); pa-
rental rejection (Whitbeck, Hoyt, & Huck, 1994; Whit-
beck, Simons, & Conger, 1991); parent hostility (Con-
ger, McCarthy, Yang, Lahey, & Kropp, 1984); unequal
treatment of children by parents (Bedford, 1992); ideo-
logical differences (Bengtson & Kuypers, 1971); par-
ticipation in household chores, appearance, politeness,
finances, and substance abuse (Calambos & Almeida,
1992); and parental management strategies (Dishion
& Loeber, 1985; McCord, 1979; Miller, McCoy, Olson,
& Wallace, 1986). However, no attempts have been
made to consolidate these issues into a framework that
will provide the basis for systematic empirical explo-
ration into the relative salience of such issues across a
wider range of age groups.
Methods and Procedures
Our data on older parent-adult child conflict are
based on the 1991 (Wave 4) data collection of the
University of Southern California Longitudinal Study
of Generations (LSOC). In 1971, the original sample
for the LSOC was selected randomly from a study
pool of three-generation families (see Bengtson, 1975,
1996, for details). The sample pool was drawn from a
random selection of possible grandfathers who were
members of a pioneering southern California HMO
with a membership of 840,000, many of whom were
union steelworkers. Surveys were mailed to the grand-
fathers, their spouses, adult children, and adolescent
or young adult grandchildren older than 16. This cross-
sectional study evolved into a longitudinal investiga-
tion in 1985 when the original respondents were re-
located. The now four- and five-generation families
involved comprise a primarily White, economically
stable, middle- and working-class sample. In 1991, the
20-year longitudinal response rate from the original
2,044 respondents was 60%. Results from this study
are similar to distributions from national probability
samples on attitudes, contact, and cohesion, as reported
in Acock and Bengtson (1980); Bengtson (1996); Glass,
Bengtson, and Dunham (1986); Roberts and Bengtson
(1993); and Silverstein and Bengtson (1991).
Building a Typology of Conflict Issues
Our analysis focuses on the comments written into
the 1991 mail-out survey (N = 1,137) by parents (G2
children of the original grandfathers) and their (G3)
adult children. The parent generation had a mean age
of 62 (N = 496) and their adult children averaged
39 years (N - 641). Thus, we are examining con-
cerns expressed by a parental generation born during
the Depression years and their children who grew up
influenced by the Sixties. They responded to the
following question at the end of a section of forced-
choice items about intergenerational solidarity (see
Bengtson, 1996):
No matter how well two people get along, there are
times they disagree or get annoyed about something.
In the last few years, wnat are some things on which
you have differed, disagreed, or been disappointed
about (even if not. openly discussed) with your child
(or parent)?
We reviewed the 1,137 returned surveys in order to
identify those containing comments that reflected
conflicts or hostility toward the other generation as a
first step in developing the conflict typology. A word-
processed document was set up for each family into
which all responses to the question were typed. Thus
we could compare parents' and adult children's com-
ments, and sort them under various thematic head-
ings. We printed these thematic files and used paper
copies for analysis.
We read and reread responses, grouped and re-
grouped general categories, initially looking for themes
that have been used to categorize adolescent-parent
conflicts (Galambos & Almeida, 1992; Smetana, 1989).
Three coders worked independently to code all re-
sponses. Originally we identified 12 themes of inter-
generational conflict; however, numerous passes at
test coding indicated that we could reduce the catego-
ries to 6 types and still adequately capture the flavor of
responses. These are summarized in Table 1. The 6
types that emerged relate to conflicts about: (1) com-
munication and interaction style; (2) habits and lifestyle
choices; (3) child-rearing practices and values; (4) work
habits and orientation; (5) politics, religion, and ideol-
ogy, and (6) household standards or maintenance.
To test the final scheme, two coders independently
coded 200 comments to assess discrepancies. After
an additional 300 responses were randomly selected
and then coded, interrater reliability exceeded 86%
agreement.
262 The Gerontologist
Table 1. A Typology of Conflicts and Tensions Between Older Parents and Their Adult Children
Type of Conflict Operational Definition
Communication and Interaction
Style
Habits and Lifestyles
Child-Rearing Practices
and Values
Politics, Religion, and Ideology
Work Orientation
Household Maintenance
Conflict over the way family members engage in their relationships across generations.
Examples: Communication styles ("he is always yelling"; "she has become quite critical"),
situational responses ("she jumps to conclusions"), interpersonal relationships ("mother
dominates my father--I don't like that"; "the way my father treats my mother").
Conflict over lifestyle issues: sexual activity/orientation/experiences, living arrangements, quality
of life, the allocation of resources and or education.
Examples: Style of dress, hair style, types of recreation, educational/occupational choices, use
of alcohol or drugs, not attending to physical needs.
Conflict over methods or philosophy regarding parenting.
Examples: Decisions concerning having or spacing of children, dimensions of permissiveness/
control, rules/expectations, loving/unloving, forgiving/resenting, support/involvement.
Disagreement about religious, moral, ethical, and political attitudes or ideas.
Examples: Lack of religious belief or overinvolvement in religion, questions concerning the
integrity of the United States, feelings about involvement in Vietnam and the Gulf War,
values or the lack of them as perceived by the respondent.
Differences concerning priority and investment given work (or school) performance,
advancement, or status.
Examples: Child working too much or too little, degree of dedication to work.
Conflict over participation in maintenance or improvement of family living environment.
Examples: Yardwork, housework, painting, and general maintenance.
Results
First, it is clear that many respondents viewed this
open-ended portion of the LSOC survey as an oppor-
tunity to air their differences with the other genera-
tion. Slightly more than two thirds of older parents
wrote comments expressing disagreement and con-
flict in their relationship with their children, listing an
average of 1.03 issues per respondent. A similar per-
centage of adult children (66%) expressed conflict, but
the rate of complaints was slightly higher, averaging
1.88 issues per respondent. Of the aging parents, 67%
(334) expressed conflict in at least one of the six issue
domains summarized in Table 1; 3% (17) had no written
responses; and 29% (145) responded to the question
but expressed no conflict with their child (instead, they
wrote in comments such as "we have a great relation-
ship" and "we have never had any conflict"). The dis-
tribution of adult children's responses is about the same:
66% (426) reported conflict with one or more of their
parents; 11% (69) did not respond; and 23% (146)
did not express conflict in their reports, instead writ-
ing in some comment about the harmonious nature
of their relationship.
Second, two types of issues emerged as the most
frequent focus of intergenerational conflicts in this
sample. Problems in communication and interaction
style were mentioned by 32% of all respondents, com-
bining responses of parent and adult child genera-
tions. Disagreements over personal habits and choices
were cited by an additional 32%. The remaining one
third of responses were distributed as follows: child-
rearing practices and values (16%); politics, religion,
ideology (12%); work habits and orientation (6%); and
household standards or maintenance (2%).
Third, although there were some contrasts between
generations in the frequency distribution of conflict
types, they were not as striking as we had expected.
Figure 1 summarizes these.
When we looked at parents' reports about conflicts
with adult children (Figure 1A), the type most fre-
quently mentioned was differences over personal
habits and lifestyle choices (38%). This was followed
by concerns about communication and interaction
(25%) and child-rearing practices and values (14%).
The pattern of children's reports about conflicts with
parents is slightly different (Figure 1B). Most frequently
mentioned were issues of communication and inter-
action (34%), followed by personal habits and lifestyle
choices (30%) and child-rearing issues (16%). Conflicts
about work habits and orientations were listed by
slightly more parents (10%) than children (4%), whereas
more adult children cited differences over politics, re-
ligion, and ideology (15%) than did parents (9%). House-
hold standards and maintenance were mentioned
more by parents (4%) than children (1%).
We want to note, however, that these percentage
distributions'should be viewed with caution, given the
exploratory nature of this study and the configura-
tions of our longitudinal sample. Future research with
a nationally representative sample may result in dif-
ferent distributions among the six conflict types. What
is more important is to summarize what our respon-
dents told us about intergenerational conflicts in their
Vol. 39, No. 3, 1999 263
10% Work
Orientation
9% Politics and
Religion
4% Household
Maintenance
14% Child-
Rearing Practices
38% Habits & Life-
style Choices
25%
Communication
and Interaction
B
4% Work
Orientation
15% Politics and
Religion
1% Household
Maintenance
16% Child-Rearing
Practices
34%
Communication
and Interaction
30% Habits & Life-
style Choices
Figure 1. (A) Parents' reports about conflicts with their adult children. (B) Adult children's reports about conflicts with their aging
parents.
264 The Gerontologist
own words, so future researchers can examine the
extent to which the types we have identified are
appropriate for their own samples.
Conflict Type 1: Communication
and Interaction Style
This category reflects conflicts about an individual's
way of engaging with others, primarily within the fam-
ily network. Unrealized expectations seem to be the
basis of many of these responses, which reflect con-
cerns about communication, contact, and interaction.
A frequent complaint in this sample is that com-
munication is strained or nonexistent. Communication
problems are described in three ways. First, some re-
ports located the conflict in how communication takes
place--the style of communication. One son (age 36)
complains of his mother's (age 62) "inability to com-
municate . . . to air her feelings rationally" A daughter
(41) complains of the lack of symmetry in communi-
cation with her father (65) by stating that he would
"talk [at] you, not discuss things with you." Second,
being overly critical may also be a disturbing part of
relationships. A daughter (34) says, "My father never
has given me a compliment. Only points out the
negative." Third, another difficulty is around the ac-
tual content of the communication. These reports
range from lack of truthfulness to "being verbally abu-
sive." One daughter (36) reports the lack of honesty
that has produced conflict in her relationship with
her father:
My dad [63] divorced his second wife and pretended
to still be married to her for six months until he told
us. Weird! He told us 15 years after the fact that he'd
had a drinking problem and gone to AA. I don't un-
derstand why he keeps personal things private so
long that actually affect us, and then tells us later
when the incident has lost its impact for us, except to
make it clear he's lying to us half the time.
Lack of contact with the other generation was a
subtheme of conflict in this category. Some respon-
dents, both parents and adult children, report feelings
of abandonment and alienation. A 37-year-old daugh-
ter complains that during the past two years her
father (63) "has never made an attempt to visit," while
a mother (62) complains of "not being included" by
her child. She continues: "They are so into their own
family . . . that I feel very left out at times." Children
are also disturbed to see unsatisfying but persistent
interaction patterns crossing generational boundaries.
One son (41) says this in reference to his mother:
Has spent little or no time with [her] grandchildren.
Has shown little concern about my family and wife.
Did not spend time with me while I was growing
up.
In some cases the reported disagreements come
as a result of divorce and remarriage. One father (74)
recognizes that conflict with his son (43) is a direct
result of his divorce by saying, "I divorced his mother.
My son is not happy about this."
The structural disruption of families caused by di-
vorce and remarriage is perceived as a serious con-
straint to both communication and contact. The com-
ments of two adult daughters illustrate this point:
I am disappointed in my father because he long ago
chose to cease communication with all his children
from marriage to my mom. It is something that truly
distresses me at this time in my life. I wish I could
talk to him but he doesn't want us to know where he
lives. (Daughter, 41)
My sister has two kids from an interracial marriage.
My Dad's wife refuses to allow them to her home.
My Dad has not overridden her wishes. I find that
extremely disappointing, as he loves them very much.
He should learn to assert himself on important issues.
(Daughter, 40)
Finally, children's comments report conflict over the
way one parent behaves toward the other, or the
lack of a parent using self-preserving tactics to defend
against the other spouse's perceived abuses. A daugh-
ter (40) complains about her parents mutually picking
on each other and her father's "deprecating comments"
about her mother. Another daughter (34) says:
I wish my mother would have stood up for herself
during her almost 40-year marriage. She is totally de-
pendent on my dad and lets him belittle her and run
her life.
Conflict Type 2: Habits and Lifestyle Choices
Differences in personal habits and lifestyle is the
second largest category of responses we recorded. This
is an issue mentioned most often by the older genera-
tion. This category reflects conflict over choices mem-
bers of the other generation have made regarding the
way they live their lives, how they invest their time
and money, and with whom. An example is a 63-
year-old father's objections to his son's "choice of
girl for his wife . . . [she is] uneducated, selfish, un-
sociable, unstable, etc. etc." There are also conflicts
that seem to express a world view common to many
in the older generation. This same father writes:
He [39] wants all things like his generation of baby
boomers, right now--new cars, new houses, vacations
--all of it on one income and that a blue collar job
income.
This is echoed elsewhere in another father's (60) com-
ment over his daughter's (37) lack of "concern for
saving something 'for a rainy day.'" Another father (71)
reports that his son's (37) "using credit cards to the
limit" is an area of disagreement.
Prominent among complaints about habits and life-
style are reports concerning economic choices, sexu-
ality, and health-related concerns. First, disagreements
over spending priorities arise when older parents and
adult children become concerned about the other
generation's ability to provide for themselves. Some-
times conflict arises from a fear of continued depen-
dency. A daughter (37) says, "They both have been
Vnl 1Q Nn 3 1QQQ 265
helping [me] financially and I know they hate it." Yet
in another family, it is the adult daughter (37) who
complains about the parents:
I am disappointed that my father [59] allows my mother
to spend all their money and doesn't seem concerned
with how they'll survive when they retire. ,,
There is also friction over spending priorities. A mother
(63) notes conflict with her son about "how they spent
their money." Her son's (40) words indicate another
perspective:
They [parents] are very conservative. They have the
money to do whatever they want, but yet they de-
prive themselves of things they can well afford.
Second, lifestyle choices may involve sexual mores
of adult children that differ sharply from those of
their parents. For many older parents, cohabitation is
a troublesome issue. A daughter (41) writes:
We differ on women's roles and I'm disappointed in
her [mother's, 67] inability to be happy with my choices
(living with someone I'm not married to and choosing
not to have children).
Generational views on "premarital sex" often di-
verge. One mother (68) writes that "good girls don't"
(presumably in conflict with her daughter's behavior,
though this is not amplified). Another older mother
(58) regards a "second out-of-wedlock pregnancy" with
displeasure. Not surprisingly, same-sex relationships
often produce tension. A mother (61 ) says regarding
her daughter (39):
Her decision to form a gay [lesbian] relationship has
been very difficult for me. This despite the fact that
her woman friend is wonderful and we do get along
well. I have a very "split" attitude about this.
Third, disagreement also occurs over what are per-
ceived to be responsible health choices. Differences
regarding smoking recreational drug use, alcohol,
and obesity are frequently mentioned. A daughter (37)
notes that her father "drinks too much [and] tries to
manipulate [me] through guilt" and complains that her
mother "continues to wallow in self-pity and indulge
in her cycle of weight gain, depression and eating/
alcoholism." Occasionally conflict is expressed over
choices that have impacts on the third generation. A
father (60) states that his daughter (37) and her hus-
band "continue to smoke, even around the baby."
Conflict Type 3: Child-rearing
Practices and Values
Child-rearing attitudes and practices are frequently
reported as a cause of tension between parents who
are in their early 60s and their baby boomer-cohort
children who were influenced by the more egalitar-
ian and permissive attitudes of their generation. Re-
ports fell into two general categories: (1) children's
complaints about their parents' child-rearing prac-
tices in the past; and (2) complaints by children or
aging parents about interaction with the grandchild
generation.
Child-rearing methods employed by the older par-
ent years earlier can cause resentments in the adult
child that are harbored throughout the life course.
Many adult children speak of unequal treatment
and favoritism practiced by their parents as an area of
conflict. A 35-year-old son reports that "she continues
to treat me as a young child. Openly favors my older
brother." A daughter (38) complained that her mother
(61) failed to practice "fair and equal treatment of all
nine of my siblings, both in monetary and emotional
terms." Acfult children also feel these inequalities filter
down to their offspring. A son (42) says of his mother
(62), "My kids are not as important as my sister's kids
. . . even though Adam is the best athlete and Justin
carries a 3.82 GPA."
Both older parents and adult children report dis-
agreement over contemporary child-rearing practices.
Some older parents complain that "children grow up
too soon and know too much about sex, violent
movies, etc., at too young an age." They worry that
their grandchildren are not properly dressed, don't
have balanced diets, and have bad sleep and TV
habits. They suggest that their children are "too easy"
on the grandchildren. From the adult child perspec-
tive, a 42-year-old daughter says this:
My mom (69) does not like the way we have raised
our children in some areas. We give our children a
lot more freedom and choices than my mom.
In some cases such as the two that follow, adult chil-
dren complained of their parents' interference in rais-
ing their children:
When my parents came for a visit, my mother [67]
kept disciplining my children while I was present.
(Daughter, 38)
As she is still young [51] for a grandmother she has
difficulty in not "mothering" my children. She still takes
control, corrects, disciplines and is much too tough
for my idea of a grandmother. (Daughter, 36)
Divorce produces a different set of problems. Both
parents and their adult children complain that divorce
in the other generation has produced unnecessary
strain on the grandchildren. For example, a daughter
(36) says she has disagreements with her mother (58)
because of:
My divorce. How she tries to control my children be-
cause they do not have a father around . . . for some
reason she wants to be a parent, not a grandparent.
Conflict Type 4: Religion,
Politics, and Ideology
This category represents conflict over values and
morality in general, and religious, ideological and po-
litical orientations in particular. Both older parents and
adult children in our sample complained about seri-
ous differences between themselves and the other
generation. Respondents often provided a laundry list
266 The Gerontologist
of issues, such as a father's comment regarding an
adult child ("Religion, marriage, politics, view of life
in general") or sweeping generalities such as another
father commenting about his daughter "not being
in tune with the values with which she was raised."
Many respondents were more specific. One set of par-
ents (C2s) spoke about moral and value differences
between them and their son.
Standard of value determined by a. price, b. status of
manufacturer. Gifts given to son returned to store
because it wasn't exactly what he wanted. I feel [he]
should unbend--relax--be more tolerant--not so
square--be more street-wise! (Mother, 66)
The father (68) provides an additional insight:
Arranging leveraged buy-outs which often cause loss
of jobs and huge debt (he is in bank corporate loan
dept.). I have told him of my moral disagreement of
this process--enriching a few while causing distress
to many--it is part of the job to him. Too much em-
phasis on making money and having the best of
everything.
In another family a daughter (39) says this of her fa-
ther (69):
A lot of his values disappoint me greatly and I don't
respect him as much as I could; e.g., he's still racist
(but not always overtly), sexist, and rather classist. He's
not always honest about expressing his feelings. He
never likes to admit he's wrong--his ego still gets in
the way of communication.
Religious beliefs were often mentioned as areas of
conflict. For one son (40), the bone of contention be-
tween him and his mother (62) was the way "[the
son]' should treat/deal with [his] brother's lack of reli-
gious observance," because the son claimed, "it af-
fects me and my family." Religious differences between
the parent and child were also mentioned. One son
(42) placed "abortion [and] women becoming priests"
at the center of their differences. A daughter (40) was
frustrated that her father "wants [her] to go to two
major religious services yearly." A mother cited her
daughter "not going to church" as an area of conflict.
In some families the difference of religious commit-
ment becomes an area of conflict, as expressed quite
differently by two adult children:
Disappointed that she [58] doesn't understand my re-
lationship to Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. (Daugh-
ter, 36)
[Conflict is] that we must be born again into Christ
Jesus. That we must raise our children for God, not
the devil or world. That we should not teach kids about
Santa, Easter Bunny, Halloween, Tooth Fairy, and other
lies. (Son, 37)
Conflicts over ideological differences are also ap-
parent over political issues. Adult children registered
complaints both over their parents' liberalism and con-
servatism. One son (43) speaks of conflict regarding
"politics. I'm conservative, mom's [63] liberal," while
a daughter (43) states:
My father [63] is very conservative in lifestyle and poli-
tical beliefs. Sometimes he says things about "people
who . . . ," not fully conscious that I am one of those
people.
One father (67) describes the area of conflict with his
son as this:
As a "hawk" [my] patience with a pacifist is very lim-
ited and we definitely disagree in terms of sanctions
vs offensive action in the Mideast crisis.
Conflict Type 5: Work Habits
and Orientation
This category reflects conflict over commitment to
work performance or advancement. Our sample re-
flects the views of Depression-age parents and their
children, born into post-World War II prosperity, who
may have different work norms and outlooks on the
future. A few parents worried their children worked
too hard, which limited their contact with family. But
more common was the criticism that their children
did not work hard enough. For example, three differ-
ent parents commented that their child is "wanting to
live off other people," unable to "make a good liv-
ing," or displays a "lack of ambition." Another mother
(69) says of her adult son (40):
We are just the opposite. [My son] is not concerned
with achieving much in life. He is content to live here
and be taken care of. He is not ambitious about any-
thing.
Nonetheless, it was not uncommon for the career
attainments of adult children in our sample to outstrip
those of their parents. Over the two decades spanned
by the study, the sample, on the whole, has become
increasingly better educated and better off financially
(Biblarz, Bengtson, & Bucur, 1996). Differences in ever-
increasing occupational achievement can lead to diffi-
cult misunderstandings. One son's (42) complaint about
his father illustrates this problem:
[His] lack of understanding of my work. [His] lack of
understanding of what companies expect and his
general blue collar type work attitude.
This "lack of understanding" may be a function of a
parent's own work experience in a different era of
American life, yet often we found these conflicts illus-
trated a parent's more resolute work ethic. For in-
stance, a father (73) writes that "his [son's, age 44]
work habits seem somewhat tentative. He is well-to-
do but doesn't work as hard as he might." Here a
mother reports conflict with her son, followed by the
son's parallel comment about his parents:
He still seems to have such a childish daydream atti-
tude toward life . . . in job situation becomes bored
quick and resents authority--has trouble adapting to
change--feels rules were "not made for him"--walked
out on previous job in 1989 with an attitude of "if
you won't play my way, I'll go home," was then fired
and could not understand it. He is NOT in an au-
thority position. (Mother, 61)
Vol. 39, No. 3, 1999 267
Both [parents] still treat me as though I don't have a
brain to think for myself. My ideas and suggestions
are not considered and most of the time, whatever I
feel is treated like a breeze in the wind. Not much
consideration from either parent. (Son, 40)
Conflict Type 6: Household Standards
or Maintenance
Many of those who mention conflict over house-
hold labor participation are parents and children liv-
ing in the same household. Due to divorce or finan-
cial setbacks, there were many cases in our sample of
the adult child returning to live in the parents' home
temporarily. (It should be noted that in many instances
the relationship improved when the child moved out.)
This mother (59) expressed her frustration with her
38-year-old daughter:
Daughter spent very little time at home during the 4
years she lived with me. She wanted to party and
refused to stay home and care for her 2 children. I
was the major caretaker for my 2 grandchildren.
A second set of complaints in this category cen-
tered around performance of household tasks; these
were most frequently an issue between mothers and
daughters, even when they lived separately. One daugh-
ter (41 ) said, "Our kitchen routines are totally differ-
ent. She does things her way and I have my way."
Another said, "My culinary and 'hostess skills' never
quite match up to her standards." One mother (65)
said of her daughter (37), "She's a pack rat. Her home
is a mess and she expects too much of the two girls,
11 and 14."
Third, some adult children were concerned about
their aging parents' attention to their households. Pos-
sibly these concerns came from witnessing diminish-
ing capacities and new responsibilities for themselves
looming in the future. A daughter (46) is upset that
her father (71), no longer physically able to do main-
tenance chores, is "unwilling . . . to spend his money
to get [these] things done." A son (38) says:
Both my parents have reached a point where they
do not clean up the house, and when confronted,
they say they are too tired; she works, he does not,
but he is barely able to walk.
Discussion
The data reported in this article suggest three
things: (1) There is considerable evidence of conflict
reported by both older parents and adult children
when they are allowed to vent their concerns in an
open-ended survey format; (2) the issues around which
conflict occurs in these aging family dyads can be
typologized around six themes, with a majority of re-
sponses involving issues of interaction style and per-
sonal habits and lifestyle; and (3) there is value to a
multiple-domain approach to conflict in families.
Our data suggest that conflict in older parent-adult
child relationships may be more widespread than is
commonly assumed. In our sample, two thirds of older
parents (average age 62) and adult children (average
age 39) reported conflict in their relationship with the
other generation. This finding challenges previous re-
ports of conflict in later-life families in two ways. First,
the prevailing image of later-life intergenerational re-
lationships is one suggesting relatively little conflict (see
Mancini & Bleiszner, 1989). That two thirds of par-
ents and children in our sample report strife in tneir
relationships suggests that conflict remains a part of
family relationships well into the later years. Second,
roughly the same proportion of parents and children
reported conflict in their relationships. Researchers ex-
ploring parent-child relationships report that parents
present their relationships with their children in more
favorable terms than do their children, supporting the
"intergenerational stake" hypothesis (see, for example,
Bengtson & Kuyper, 1971; Giarrusso, Stallings, & Bengt-
son, 1995; Hagestad, 1986). Our data, however, re-
veal a willingness on the part of older parents to ac-
knowledge and to report conflict with their children,
though (paradoxically) the principal axis of their rela-
tionship may be characterized by high levels of soli-
darity and mutual support (Bengtson, Rosenthal, &
Burton, 1990).
The prevalence of conflict in older parent-adult child
relationships reported here requires comment. The poten-
tial for debilitating effects of conflict is clear. Although
families demonstrate a range of tolerance, relationship
conflict in these later-life families may result in many
problems. The continual drain of emotional resources
necessary to maintain conflicted relationships may re-
sult in their eventual decay to what have been termed
"long-term, lousy relationships" (Bengtson, 1996). The
comments of one mother (65) and her son (43) point
to blocked communications as one of a plethora of
potential outcomes of persistent conflict:
I chose not to communicate with my son. I am tired
of verbal abuse and I have faced reality. My son told
me he had no feelings for me. (Mother)
She still has a tendency to be negative (typically Jew-
ish) and blows up with "get out, go away." Consider-
ing difficulty I am having with ex-wife, decided to avoid
her for time being. (Son)
Conflict may result in diminished physical or psycho-
logical well-being for the individual. It may also bring
about a decline in overall relationship quality with rip-
pling effects into other aspects of the relationship. For
example, conflict and its relational effects may lessen
the willingness to participate in caregiving and to limit
the frequency or duration of the support provided to
failing parent. Acknowledging that conflict exists in
later-life parent-child relationships is a necessary step
toward understanding and responding responsibly to
conflict in later-life families.
In addition, future research must consider a multiple-
domain approach to conflict in aging families. There
has been a tendency toward constrained explorations
of conflict that focus on the properties of conflict--
conflict frequency, intensity, or duration. This type of
inquiry ignores the variable effects of the issues around
which conflict occurs. In our sample, conflict was re-
268 The Gerontologist
ported around a variety of issues with some noted
differences between parents and children. Older par-
ents and adult children are likely to possess varying
degrees of tolerance for particular issues of conflict.
An issue particularly troublesome in some families may
produce little or no turbulence in others.
We offer a typology of conflict issues that can be
used to illuminate the consequences of particular con-
flict issues by allowing more precise and systematic
investigations. We found that older parents and adult
children reported conflict in six domains. Most fre-
quently mentioned were conflicts over the way family
members relate to others, and conflicts over habits and
lifestyles. These two categories represent nearly two
thirds of all reports. The rest of the reports of conflict
were distributed between four additional categories (in
descending order of priority): disagreement over child-
rearing practices, ideological differences, work habits,
and household labor.
That these types of intergenerational conflicts may
have important implications for well-being is sug-
gested by other studies. For example, the way family
members relate in the family context (communication
and interaction style) predicts relationship quality (Whit-
beck et al., 1991), perceptions of cumulative parent-
child relationship (Johnson, 1979), filial concern, rela-
tionship strain, effectual solidarity (Whitbeck et al., 1994)
and psychological distress of both parents and chil-
dren (Umberson, 1992). Conflicts over child-rearing
practices may result in a number of troublesome child
behaviors (Loeber & Dishion, 1984; Patterson & Strout-
hamer-Loeber, 1984), and frustration and conflict over
parental favoritism has been shown to predict the
quality of adult children's bonds with their parents
(Bedford, 1992). Similarly, lifestyle issues (e.g., sub-
stance abuse) reduce the child's attraction to his or
her parents and result in lasting effects on parent-child
interaction patterns (Simons, Conger, & Whitbeck,
1988).
Conflict seems to be both pervasive and a natural
part of family interactions. Assessing several domains
of conflict is useful, particularly when developmental
changes in family relationships or psychological well-
being of family members are at issue. Further inquiry
into family conflict should focus on: (1) the stability of
conflict in relationships over time through longitudinal
research designs; (2) refining the proposed typology
of conflict domains by focusing on more ethnically and
racially diverse samples of aging parents and middle-
aged children; and (3) beginning systematic investi-
gations into the trajectories and effects of specific
conflict issues. For example, do issues of particular
conflict episodes (e.g., divorce, loss of jobs, disability
leading to sudden retirement, health crises) predict the
intensity, duration, or the interaction processes through
the long-term course of solidarity and conflict? This
approach will begin to reveal how issues function as
a single component of conflict, whether as conduits
(forces that channel the flow of conflict in a family-
patterned way), conductors (forces that orchestrate the
way conflict unfolds), or catalysts (accelerating agents
igniting already inflamed relationships).
Finally, we note a persistent theme in many of our
respondents' reports: a desire for their relationships
witn the other generation to be more satisfying. This
is important. It is also important to note that although
families may acknowledge tension, disagreements, and
conflicts, at the same time they can also report high
levels of intergenerational solidarity, indicating there
is affection, contact, and mutual support (Silverstein,
Parrott, & Bengtson, 1995). This is the paradoxical nature
of family relationships over the life course in which
the balance between solidarity and conflict can teeter
back and forth--or remain in perfect balance, one con-
tained within the other. These contradictions witness
the dynamics of ebb and flow, the interplay between
structure and process, which mask the hidden strengths,
weaknesses, and'paradox in multigenerational fami-
lies (Bengtson et al., 1995). Future research should there-
fore focus on the link between conflict issues, family
solidarity, and individual well-being. Such inquiries will
provide a clear focus for intervention strategies directed
toward specific conflict-issue domains that will allow
families to enter the final stages of life with less ten-
sion, and perhaps open the channels for increased
understanding and support.
References
Acock, A., & Bengtson, V. L. (1980). Socialization and attribution pro-
cesses: Actual versus perceived similarity among parents and youth.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42, 501-515.
Bedford, V. (1992). Memories of parental favoritism and the quality of
parent-child ties in adulthood. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences,
47, S149-S155.
Bengtson, V. L. (1975). Generation and family effects in value socializa-
tion. American Sociological Review, 40, 358-371.
Bengtson, V. L. (1996). Continuities and discontinuities in intergenerational
relationships over time. In V. L. Bengtson (Ed.), Adulthood and aging:
Research on continuities and discontinuities (pp. 271-303). New York:
Springer.
Bengtson, V. L, & Kuypers, J. A. (1971). Generational difference and the
"developmental stake." International Journal of Aging and Human Devel-
opment, 2, 249-260.
Bengtson, V. L, Rosenthal, C. J., & Burton, L. M. (1990). Families and
aging: Diversity and heterogeneity. In R. Binstock & L. George (Eds.),
Handbook of aging and the social sciences (3rd ed., pp. 263-287).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Bengtson, V. L, Rosenthal, C. J., & Burton, L. M. (1995). Paradoxes of
families and aging. In R. H. Binstock & L. K. George (Eds.), Handbook
of aging and the social sciences (4th ed., pp 253-282). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Biblarz, T. J., Bengtson, V. L, & Bucur, A. (1996). Social mobility across
three generations. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 58, 188-200.
Conger, R., McCarthy, J., Yang, R., Lahey, B., & Kropp, J. (1984). Percep-
tion of child, childrearing values and emotional distress as mediating
links between environmental stressors and observed maternal behav-
ior. Child Development, 55, 2234-2247.
Dishion, T. J., & Loeber, R. (1985). Adolescent marijuana and alcohol
use: The role of parents and peers revisited. American Journal of Drug
and Alcohol Abuse, 11, 11-25.
Galambos, N. L, & Almeida, D. M. (1992). Does parent-adolescent con-
flict increase in early adolescence? Journal of Marriage and the Fam-
ily, 54, 737-747.
Giarrusso, R., Stallings, M., & Bengtson, V. L. (1995). The "intergenerational
stake" hypothesis revisited: Parent-child differences in perceptions of
relationships 20 years later. In V. L. Bengtson, K. W. Schaie, & L. M.
Burton (Eds.), Adult intergenerational relations: Effects of societal change
(pp. 227-263). New York: Springer.
Glass, J., Bengtson, V. L, & Dunham, C. C. (1986). Attitude similarity in
three-generation families: Socialization, status inheritance, or recipro-
cal influence.-Amencan Sociological Review, 51, 685-698.
Hagestad, G. O. {1986). The aging society as a context for family life.
Daedalus, 115, 119-139.
Johnson, E. S. (1978). "Good" relationships between older mothers and
their daughters: A causal model. The Cerontologist, 18, 301-306.
Kuypers, J. A., & Bengtson, V. L. (1990) Toward understanding health in
older families impacted by Alzheimer's disease. In T. Brubaker (Ed.),
Family relationships in later life (2nd ed., pp. 245-266). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Loeber, R., & Dishion, T. J. (1984). Boys who fight at home and school:
Vol. 39, No. 3, 1999 269
Family conditions influencing cross-setting consistency. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 759-768.
Mancini, J. A., & Blieszner, R. (1989). Aging parents and adult children:
Research themes in intergenerational relations. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 51, 275-290.
McCord, J. (1979). Some child-rearing antecedents of criminal behavior
in adult men. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1477-
1486.
Miller, B. C, McCoy, J. K., Olson, T. D., & Wallace, C. M. (1986). Paren-
tal control attempts and adolescent sexual behavior. Journal of Mar-
riage and the Family, 48, 503-512.
Montemayor, R. (1983). Parents and adolescents in conflict: All families
some of the time and some families most of the time. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 3, 83-103.
Papini, D. R., & Sebby, R. A. (1988). Variations in conflictual family is-
sues by adolescent pubertal status, gender, and family member. Jour-
nal of Early Adolescence, 8, 1-15.
Patterson, C. R., & Strouthamer-Loeber,- M. (1984). The correlation of
family management practices and delinquency. Child Development,
55, 1299-1307.
Preston, M., Gardner, M., Royal, C, & Bengtson, V. L. (1997). A tale of
two families: A case study comparison of four-generation families.
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of The Gerontological Society
of America, Cincinnati, OH, November 1997.
Roberts, R. E. L, & Bengtson, V. L. (1993). Relationships with parents,
self-esteem, and psychological well-being in young adulthood: A fur-
ther examination of identity theory. Social Psychological Quarterly,
56, 263-277.
Silverstein, M., & Bengtson, V. L. (1991). Do close parent-child relations
reduce the mortality risk of older parents? A test of the direct and
buffering effects of intergenerational affection. The Journal of Health
and Social Behavior, 32, 382-395.
Silverstein, M., Parrott, T. M., & Bengtson, V. L. (1995). Factors that pre-
dispose middle-aged sons and daughters to provide social support to
older parents. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 57, 465-475.
Simons, R., Conger, R., & Whitbeck, L. (1988). A multistage social learn-
ing model of the influences of family and peers upon adolescent sub-
stance abuse. Journal of Drug Issues, 18, 293-316.
Smetana, J. G. (1989). Adolescents' and parents' reasoning about actual
family conflict. Child Development, 60, 1052-1067.
Straus, M. A. (1979). Measuring intrafamily conflict and violence: The
Conflict Tactics (CT) Scales. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 41,
75-88.
Umberson, D. (1992). Relationships between adult children and their parents:
Psychological consequences for both generations. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 54, 664-674.
Whitbeck, L. B., Hoyt, D. R., & Huck, S. M. (1994). Early family relation-
ships, intergenerational solidarity, and support provided to parents by
their adult children. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 49, S85-
S94.
Whitbeck, L. B., Simons, R. L, & Conger, R. D. (1991). The effects of
early family relationships on contemporary relationships and assistance
patterns between adult children and their parents. Journal of Geron-
tology: Social Sciences, 46, S330-S337.
Winch, R. (1971). The modern family (3rd ed.). New York: Holt, Reinhardt,
Winston.
Received February 25, 1998
Accepted February 25, 1999
UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA, RENO
The Sanford Center for Aging
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR OF EDUCATION
Qualifications:
 Doctorate degree in gerontology or related field
(psychology, public health, sociology, counseling,
nursing, social work, health planning, etc.) with a
minor or specialization in gerontology or a re-
search agenda directly related to gerontology or
geriatrics.
 Minimum of two years' experience in gerontology
and/or geriatric research required, five years pre-
ferred.
 Demonstrated competence in grant writing result-
ing in outside funding for educational projects in
aging.
 Excellence in teaching and experience in national
presentations.
Send letter of intent, curriculum vitae, and names,
addresses, and phone numbers of three professional
references to: Chair, Associate Director of Education
for Gerontology and Geriatrics Search Committee,
Sanford Center for Aging/146, University of Nevada,
Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0133 or fax: 775-784-1814.
Review begins August 1, 1999. EOE/AAE.
Serono Symposia USA, Inc.
Endocrinology of Aging
October 27-30, 1999, Tempe, Arizona
Scientific Committee
Barry B. Bercu, M.D., Richard F. Walker, Ph.D., Chairs
Marc R. Blackman, M.D., Michael Fossel, M.D., Ph.D.
Steven W.J. Lamberts, M.D.
The objective of this meeting is to review contemporary
knowledge of basic and clinical aspects of aging as it impacts
upon the endocrine system. Accordingly, part of the meeting will
be devoted to understanding the pathophysiological causes of
decay and dysfunction of endocrine tissues, of integration among
the different neuroendocrine axes and of the cellular and
molecular processes underlying endocrine senescence. This
information is derived primarily from research in animals and
will represent much of the precjinical logic for clinical inter-
ventions into the aging process. Current clinical interventions
such as those involving hormone replacement therapy will be
described, and more hypothetical approaches involving gene
therapy will be discussed. The symposium will present "state of
the art" applications of basic research to the human condition, as
well as insight into future trends of endocrine aging research.
This symposium is designed for physicians, scientists, and
other health professionals interested or trained in endocrinology,
gerontology and geriatric, internal and family medicine.
AMA Category I credit hours will be awarded.
For further information, please contact:
Leslie Nies, President, Serono Symposia USA, Inc.
100 Longwater Circle, Norwell, MA 02061 USA
Telephone 800-283-8088 or 781-982-9000
Fax 781-982-9481
270 The Gerontologist
