RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
Understanding the sustainability of implementing
HIV services in criminal justice settings
Christy A Visher1*, Yang Yang2, Shannon G Mitchell3, Yvonne Patterson4, Holly Swan5 and Jennifer Pankow6
Abstract
Background: In the growing field of implementation science, sustainability is a critical component of the
implementation process of moving evidence-based treatments to regular practice. This paper is intended to extend
our understanding of factors that influence the sustainability of HIV services in correctional settings following an
organization-level intervention designed to implement improvements in preventing, detecting, or treating HIV for
persons under correctional supervision.
Methods: Using semi-structured interviews to elicit perceptions from the principal researcher and executive
sponsor at each of nine participating sites, this study explores the variations in the sustainability of HIV services in
these criminal justice settings following the experimental implementation intervention.
Results: In six of the nine sites, changes in HIV services implemented as a result of the organizational intervention
were sustained six to nine months following the end of project implementation. Organizational endorsement at
multiple levels is likely the principal factor that facilitates sustainability.
Conclusions: The factors that result in the sustainability of changes to health services in correctional organizations
include elements internal and external to the organization. Implementation strategies, such as the change team
model strategy used in this study, are also sustainable and can be used to identify other changes that could be
made, or improve other aspects of service delivery.
Keywords: Implementation; Sustainability; HIV services; Correctional facility; Change team
Evidence-based public health programs can deliver positive
health outcomes, but only if they are able to sustain these
actions over time. Although there is growing evidence
about the types of interventions that may be successfully
implemented (Grimshaw et al. 2012; Michie et al. 2009),
there is considerably less knowledge regarding how and
why new ways of working are sustained and become estab-
lished in everyday practice (Aarons et al. 2011). This ques-
tion of sustainability is critical to translating research on
evidence-based practices into routine operations.
Background
In the implementation and dissemination literature, sus-
tainability is considered a stage in an overall cycle of inter-
vention development, adoption, implementation and
adaptation (Proctor et al. 2009, 2011); thus, it is useful to
consider sustainability in relation to the earlier stages. Proc-
tor et al. (2009) regard sustainability as a type of implemen-
tation outcome as distinct from service or client outcomes
(e.g., satisfaction, symptomology) that results from the
process of using evidence-based implementation strategies
to establish new evidence-based treatments or services. The
dynamics involved in the adoption and implementation
stages often extend to the stage of sustainability.
The existing literature on organizational change and the
diffusion of innovations emphasizes that all of these pro-
cesses are often affected by the complex nature of the
organizational environment including external, institu-
tional, and political forces (Fitzgerald et al. 2002; Dopson
et al. 2002). Factors influencing sustainability include (1)
characteristics of the intervention, particularly its flexibil-
ity, cost, and effectiveness; (2) factors in the organizational
setting, such as whether the intervention is a good fit with
the organization, presence of an internal champion to
advocate for the program, organization capacity and
* Correspondence: visher@udel.edu
1Center for Drug & Health Studies, Department of Sociology and Criminal
Justice, University of Delaware, Newark, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Visher et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5
DOI 10.1186/s40352-015-0018-2
leadership, and attitudes of key staff; and (3) factors in the
community environment, including partnerships and con-
tinued funding. Scheirer and Dearing (2011) point out that
sustainable outcomes for public health programs are likely
to require processes that start long before the end of initial
implementation and program funding.
Operationalizing sustainability
Definitions and the measurement of sustainability have
also received increasing attention in the implementation
and dissemination literature. According to Schell and
colleagues, sustainability is not simply the result of a
process but is action-oriented: the "ability to maintain
programming and its benefits over time" (2013:15) and
includes the set of organizational and contextual factors
that build capacity for maintaining a program. These
scholars identified nine domains of sustainability from a
comprehensive literature review: political support, fund-
ing stability, partnerships, organizational capacity, pro-
gram evaluation, program adaptation, communications,
public health impacts, and strategic planning (Schell
et al. 2013). These domains further divide into factors
internal to the program and factors external to the pro-
gram. However, in a different review of 125 papers on sus-
tainability, only 35 percent included a formal definition,
which focused on the continuation of programs and prac-
tices in organizations, systems, and communities during a
post-implementation period (Wiltsey Stirman et al. 2012).
Other researchers want attention paid to specifying
the achievements that have been made in sustaining pro-
grams. Scheirer and Dearing (2011) argue that research
on sustainability needs to move beyond a simple dichot-
omy of measuring: "Did the program continue or not?
(p. 2061)". Other types of implementation outcomes
might include continuation of benefits or outcomes for
clients; continuation of program activities of original
intervention; maintaining community-level partnerships
developed during the intervention; maintaining new
organizational practices, procedures, or policies; sustaining
attention to issue or problem; and program diffusion and
replication in other sites. There does not appear to be any
consensus on which type of sustainability outcome should
receive priority for research. Thus, a clear need exists for
more research on sustainability outcomes and the factors
that influence these outcomes following implementation
of evidence­based interventions (Proctor et al. 2011; Wiltsey
Stirman et al. 2012).
This paper reports the results of a sustainability sub-
study that was conducted as part of a larger implemen-
tation project. The larger project was conducted in
order to gain a better understanding of the processes
that promote the integration of evidence-based, sub-
stance abuse treatment and HIV services into criminal
justice settings. Individuals incarcerated in U.S. prisons
and jails are at high risk for mental health disorders,
substance abuse disorders, and physical health problems
such as HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, and other chronic and in-
fectious diseases (Maruschak 2012). For individuals with
HIV/AIDS, early detection and linkage to treatment are
essential best practices for managing the disease and
reducing the risk of transmission (Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention 2003). Unfortunately,
HIV services in prisons and jails suffer from lack of ad-
herence to best practices in HIV testing, prevention,
and treatment access (Beckwith et al. 2010; Booker et al.
2013; Springer and Altice 2005). Thus, it is important
for correctional facilities to close these gaps in service
delivery by initiating and maintaining evidence-based
programs that improve access to testing for HIV, en-
hance prevention through education programs, and fa-
cilitate linkages to community-based HIV services for
individuals exiting confinement.
In 2008, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) ini-
tiated the second phase of the Criminal Justice Drug Abuse
Treatment Studies (CJ-DATS 2) with a multisite cooperative
of research centers across the U.S. CJ-DATS 2 protocols tar-
geted three areas of service delivery to persons under cor-
rectional supervision (in prison or jail) with substance abuse
problems: (1) assessment and case planning; (2) medication-
assisted treatment options; and (3) HIV services (see
Ducharme et al. 2013). This paper is concerned with the
third protocol of the CJ-DATS project, HIV Services and
Treatment Implementation in Corrections (HIV-STIC),
and the sustainability of the outcomes from that study.
Methods
To gain a better understanding of the processes that pro-
mote implementation of evidence-based HIV services in
correctional settings, the HIV Services and Treatment Im-
plementation in Corrections (HIV-STIC) project utilized a
multisite, cluster randomized trial to test an organizational
process improvement strategy (Belenko et al. 2013). Each
of nine research centers was paired with a criminal justice
partner agency, generally a state- or county-level jail or
prison agency. The experimental sites initiated improve-
ments in evidence-based HIV services using a local change
team (LCT) approach involving staff from correctional,
medical, and community health agencies. With the help
of a trained coach, the change teams were expected to
engage in several actions, including a needs assessment,
strategic planning, and a series of rapid cycle process
improvement activities designed to improve either HIV
testing, prevention, or linkage to care.
The HIV service improvements implemented as a part of
the HIV-STIC protocol varied considerably across research
centers (Belenko et al. 2013). The change teams selected a
variety of HIV services for improvement during the course
of the intervention. Some examples include increasing HIV
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 2 of 9
prevention attendance among female inmates; increasing
the percentage of inmates receiving an HIV test at admis-
sion; and improving the linkage to community treatment
for HIV positive inmates leaving prison.
The majority of the literature on sustainability has in-
vestigated the implementation and sustainability of com-
munity programs promoting public health. Several
factors deemed crucial in community programs may
have a different impact on services implemented in a
correctional setting, which is a highly organized environ-
ment with distinctive priorities (i.e., public safety). The
primary aims of the sustainability and success substudy
were to carry out qualitative, comparative case-study re-
search at the nine research sites to better understand:
(1) organizational systems change and sustainability of
improvements in HIV services in correctional agencies,
and (2) organizational characteristics and processes that
lead to "successful" and "unsuccessful" implementation.
This paper addresses the first aim and reports on the
findings about the sustainability of the HIV services im-
provements using interviews with the principal re-
searcher at each center and lead administrator of their
partner criminal justice agency six to nine months after
implementation ended. The perceptions of the key infor-
mants who design and deliver the implementation are
important for understanding pertinent factors related to
service sustainability.
Research questions
The principal research question that this study sought to
address was the following: What helps and hinders the
medium-term sustainability of improvements in HIV ser-
vices in correctional settings? Specifically, this study aims to
explore three facets of sustainability: (1) What changes in
the implementation process and outcome have been sus-
tained? (2) To what extent has sustainability of policy or
practice changes been achieved? (3) What factors were
perceived by researchers and practitioners as facilitators or
barriers that influenced the sustainability of implemented
practices as well as the degree of sustainability?
Participants
The research center principal investigator (PI) and the lead
administrator, or executive sponsor (ES), (or their desig-
nees) in each of the nine study sites were recruited to
participate in an in-depth, semi-structured telephone inter-
view. In the HIV-STIC protocol, an ES is an agency-level
administrator who determines the intervention focus in
their state or county and passively monitors local progress
without being involved in day-to-day management of the
project implementation (Belenko et al. 2013). In the nine
sites, these individuals held positions such as correctional
medical director, chief medical executive, health care ad-
ministrator, deputy commissioner of support services, and
state infectious disease physician for corrections. PIs and
ESs from nine research sites were contacted; nine PIs and
eight ESs participated in the interviews (one ES was no
longer with the organization by the time the interviews
were conducted).
Procedures and measures
The semi-structured interview focused on each respon-
dent's evaluation and perception of the implementation
of the HIV-STIC intervention in their respective study
sites. Examples of topics covered in the interview per-
tinent to the current study included: (a) the impact of
the protocol on each study site, (b) elements that had
been sustained and why, and (c) lasting changes to the
delivery of HIV services. The semi-structured interview
guide was approved by the Internal Review Board at
each research center. Six to nine months following the
completion of HIV-STIC implementation, PIs and ESs
were recruited for an interview, which was conducted
by a senior qualitative researcher via telephone. Each
interview lasted about one hour. Informed consent was
obtained prior to each interview. Interviews were tran-
scribed verbatim and imported into Altas.ti for analysis.
Analyses
Inductive coding was used to analyze the qualitative
data, which generated seven primary codes: (1) change
team issues, (2) communication, (3) environmental factors,
(4) focus of intervention, (5) success, (6) sustainability, and
(7) the appropriateness of the local change team process.
Filtering on the primary code "sustainability," data were
further inductively coded, which produced three secondary
codes: (1) tangible elements of sustainability, (2) peripheral
elements of sustainability, and (3) factors associated with
sustainability. Two primary coders, supervised by a senior
qualitative researcher, were involved in the primary and
secondary coding processes. During the primary coding
stage, two coders first coded four transcripts (two PI tran-
scripts and two ES transcripts) independently and then dis-
cussed the discrepancies and consolidated the codebook.
Afterwards, coders split work but continued the discussion
and debriefing during the entire coding process. The process
was repeated during the secondary coding stage. In data
analysis, three qualitative researchers (including the two pri-
mary coders) immersed themselves in the data and dis-
cussed the emergent themes until consensus was reached.
The data analysis yielded three main themes and several
subthemes, which are explicated in the following section.
Results and discussion
Analysis revealed that during the months after imple-
mentation a majority (6 out of 9) of the research sites
were able to sustain the practices or processes that were
introduced through HIV-STIC, although the degree and
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 3 of 9
type of sustainability varied. Three types of sustainability
were reported by study participants: sustainability of
changes to HIV services, sustainability of the local
change team implementation strategy, and sustainability
of other peripheral elements related to the HIV-STIC
study. In addition to variation in the type of sustainability
that was reported, study participants indicated that the
degree of sustainability was also multifaceted in that new
practices or processes were adopted at both the agency-
level and the system-level of the site. Finally, participants
reported several factors that influenced the sustainability of
changed HIV services. Each of these themes is discussed.
Sustaining changes to HIV services
Respondents from several sites stated that they were able
to continue providing the services related to the focus
area (i.e., prevention, testing, or linkage to treatment)
that they implemented during the HIV-STIC study.
Changes were sustained either by codifying the changes
into system procedures or institutionalizing them into a
system policy. As an example of codifying new practices
into a system procedure, the PI from a site that focused
on the linkage between prison-based agencies and com-
munity treatment providers stated that:
The other thing that they did was to get meetings
scheduled with the providers and have...attendance at
those meetings become a part of their probation and
parole guidelines so that they actually had to do that
as part of their... supervision plan.
In this example, a new process for enhancing the linkage
process ­ meeting with the community provider­ was co-
dified into the standard procedures for the probation/parole
officers to follow in developing their supervision plan.
At several sites, changes in the provision of HIV services
were sustained because the implemented changes had
been institutionalized into the system policy. For example,
one PI from a site focusing on enhancing the linkage to
treatment said
The...community partner and the change team leader
created a communications form to fax back and forth
between the two agencies. And...all of that work got
instituted into DOC policy.
In addition, some sites were able to disseminate the
changes into a broader system context and reach a
greater scope. For example, the ES of a site focusing on
the linkage to treatment said:
Whatever the intervention team produced if it was
good we used it in both facilities [i.e., a male facility
and a female facility]... I mean the intervention was
finished by the time we got around to understanding
this aspect of the problem [in the process for
scheduling appointments] and investigating it in
detail... We actually went [live] with our [new] pilot
electronic medical records two weeks ago. And that's at
all the facilities here that serve females, [in] three
different facilities.
For this site, changes to practices concerning linkage to
HIV treatment (i.e., scheduling) were piloted as part of
HIV-STIC. They started with implementing an intervention
in one facility and expanded the intervention to the control
group. In the few months after implementation, these
changes were scaled-up into the broader system context
across three different facilities. This scaling-up of the practice
points to this site's ability to sustain the improvements.
Sustaining the local change team implementation
strategy
In addition to sustaining the actual changes to HIV ser-
vices, participants also highlighted the value of the Local
Change Team (LCT) model to the sites and noted how
its use was sustained beyond the HIV-STIC study as a
strategy for continuing to improve HIV services. Add-
itionally, in some sites, the LCT model was used for
implementing changes to other service areas in the
criminal justice agency. For example, a PI reported how
their criminal justice partner applied the LCT model for
promoting other health services:
Our Executive Sponsor and his bureau [buy into this
LCT model and] they've actually discussed using this
model for other issues in their system. [Administrators
in the] healthcare agency wanted to use the change
team model to figure out linkages for other chronic
health issues, not just HIV.
The sustainability of the LCT model was particularly
noteworthy when the LCT model was "scaling out"
(Hendricks Brown 2014) in a correctional setting (e.g.,
into a new environment with a different mission). For
example, an ES in one research site noted that:
I've [been] promoted to another facility that's much larger
and [has] a much different mission [i.e., intake
department] than where I was before. And so it's a
completely different focus; it's a completely different
mission and there are things that I have implemented in
processes [in the new facility] and you know it's [using] the
change model and it's served me well [in my new role].
Other peripheral elements related to the HIV-STIC study
During HIV-STIC, change team efforts were focused on
improving HIV services. However, during this process,
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 4 of 9
several peripheral elements emerged as a result of the
organizational intervention, including the establishment
of networks between different stakeholders, and en-
hanced collaboration and coordination between different
agencies. These peripheral elements are implicitly associ-
ated with the way agencies provide treatment services,
and sustaining these elements often led to improved
quality of client services. One ES stated that:
[After the implementation ended], they were [still]
using [the relationships with the community providers]
... and [keeping] in contact with [those community
providers] from our medical field prison...when
making referrals.
Likewise, one PI at another site reported that the
HIV-STIC project brought corrections and community
providers together and the communication persisted
after the implementation ended.
Once the project was over that relationship [between
corrections and community providers] still existed and
our change team leader actually got promoted to the
prisons and she took that relationship with her and is
now training her staff at the prisons to work with that
community provider and go visit the community
facility and get to know those people.
Factors influencing sustainability of changes to HIV services
In addition to identifying several facets of sustainability
as it related to the HIV-STIC study, analyses identified
several factors deemed critical for successfully sustaining
implemented changes as well as barriers that were asso-
ciated with sustaining these changes. These factors can
be categorized into three themes: organizational en-
dorsement, resources, and champions.
Organizational endorsement
Organizational endorsement, a theme composed of ad-
ministrative and staff buy-in, emerged as a prominent
facilitator to sustaining implemented changes to HIV
services. Administrative buy-in refers to administrative-
level acknowledgement of the value of the implemented
changes and willingness to actively support the continuity
of these changes. For example, one ES who confirmed that
changes were sustained at his site stressed the value he
places on service linkage:
I keep saying it's because it's the continuity of care that
we want to keep intact...And that gives us satisfaction
and also makes us feel comfortable that when we are
releasing our offender, making sure that [the offender]
has full knowledge [of where he would receive his
aftercare treatment].
In this example, administrative buy-in facilitated the
sustainability of the intervention because this ES under-
stood the value of executing the service changes and was
invested in sustaining them.
Another participant, a PI, cited the importance of staff
buy-in during project implementation for promoting the
sustainability of implemented changes:
The executive sponsor just said "yep this is what we're
doing from here on out." And the folks that we
involved, and the nice part is that [ES] doesn't even
have to filter that down because the folks involved
from the change team and even the person in the
control group at the other institution are right there,
they already know about it...The folks that are in
charge of it were already involved and so they're
already on board and it just becomes the procedure of
the institution moving forward because they're already
working on it themselves in a sense.
Given the dynamic organizational context where the
implementation took place, the organizational endorse-
ment was not always granted and a lack of buy-in became
a barrier to sustainability. For example, one PI identified
the incompatibility between implemented changes and the
organization's strategic priorities as a barrier to systematic
dissemination and sustainability:
When you look at the system's priority, not the
correctional health services around HIV but the
system's priority, that's not where they are right now
because right now what they are seeing is that they are
understaffed.
At this site, insufficient organizational endorsement
resulted from a mismatch between the project's goals
and the current organizational focus, which prevented
the sustainability of changes to HIV services imple-
mented during the HIV-STIC study. In addition, this
quote illustrates the influence of organizational re-
sources in the sustainability of implemented practices, a
prominent theme that is explicated in the following
section.
Resources and staff continuity
Participants from several sites indicated the importance
of continuous funding for sustaining services and the
constraints of the lack of resources (including human re-
sources) on sustaining the implemented changes. For ex-
ample, one ES noted that changes were discontinued
when the HIV-STIC study was over due to a lack of
funding:
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 5 of 9
It is on the shelf and I continue to bother the DOC
[Department of Corrections] to see if they will fund it.
They kept saying "yes," "maybe," "yes," "maybe". And
then I'm still working with [another agency] with the
hopes that they can write a grant. The problem is that
I'm overworked enough I don't have the time to write
grants right now and so that's where it kind of fell flat.
In this example, job priorities also served as a promin-
ent barrier wherein staff's regular job responsibilities
competed with the efforts in sustaining the changes.
This alludes to another crucial factor in determining the
sustainability of service changes: the availability and in-
volvement of key players. In fact, several sites experi-
enced administrative and line-staff turnover as a barrier
to carrying on the implemented changes, as noted by
one ES:
The person who replaced me, I think she was brand
new to the position, I think she had so much else on
her plate, so to speak, with learning the new job and
it's hard to say.
At this site, the ES's job transition exerted a negative in-
fluence on the continuity of practice adoption, which is in
sharp contrast to the facilitative effect of organizational
endorsement from the administrators and staff who
remained in their positions.
Likewise, the ES from another site was concerned
about the staff turnover at the healthcare agency which
may have produced the discontinuity of practices.
So, even if you have the policy in place, even if you have
the protocol in place, if you go through three people
within the positions and contracted health care is like
that, you have constant turnover, you know you're going
to continue to have [turnover], those issues.
Champion
Disseminating evidence-based practices in service orga-
nizations can range from "letting it happen" to "making
it happen," depending on the degree of involvement by
stakeholders (Greenhalgh et al. 2004). Indeed, participants
highlighted the influence of administrators and LCT
leaders who, beyond just buying-in and supporting the
implementation efforts, actually served as a champion
for the sustainability of implemented changes. For ex-
ample, one PI stated that the ES at their site advocated
for sustaining and scaling-up the changes to more sites:
The executive sponsor in our state was aware of all
the changes that were made and, as many might be
helpful in other settings, she moved to suggest them
and to have those kinds of changes made elsewhere.
Moreover, administrators and LCT leaders took advan-
tage of their professional experience and knowledge of
the structure and operation of healthcare agencies in
correctional settings to proactively identify the factors,
especially potential barriers, pertinent to service sustain-
ability. Illustrating this point, one PI said:
[The change team leader] kept making that very clear
along the whole way, to me and to the team and to
everybody she was saying because her whole thing was
we have to get the stuff in the policy... That was her
pushing that this needs to be DOC policy. This needs
to be DOC policy, which doesn't need to be this
contractor's practice. This needs to be DOC policy.
Clearly, this LCT leader employed her professional
vision and influences to strategically promote the
continuity of changes that emerged from the HIV-STIC
organizational intervention.
Conclusions
Despite efforts being made to reduce the gap between
evidence-based practices and routine practices (e.g.,
Proctor et al. 2009; Greenhalgh et al. 2004), there remains
a lack of literature regarding successful sustainability and
dissemination of organizational changes in health-related
settings (e.g., Goisman et al. 1999; McHugh and Barlow
2010; Stewart and Chambless 2007). Limited research has
identified the factors that influence sustainability including
characteristics of the intervention, organizational factors,
and contextual factors (e.g., Scheirer and Dearing 2011).
More research is needed, particularly regarding the factors
that influence the implementation of health services in a
criminal justice setting. Anchored in the HIV-STIC proto-
col, this study shed light on what elements were sustained
and factors that facilitated or hindered the sustainability of
the intervention across nine research sites, using principal
investigators and lead agency administrators as key
informants.
Six out of nine research sites reported that the imple-
mented services had been either codified at the site or in-
stitutionalized into agency (i.e., Department of Correction)
policy at the site, or scaled up to a broader context in
terms of extending the services or practices to other fa-
cilities. In addition, participants reported a peripheral
element of sustainability--improvements in the relation-
ship between different agencies providing HIV services.
Inter-organizational collaboration and communication,
which are opportunities for learning and information shar-
ing in the pursuit of service enhancement, are believed to
promote implementation processes and therefore quality
of services provided in organizations. The relationships
established during the course of implementation, either as
a focus area of the intervention (e.g., linkage to treatment)
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 6 of 9
or an inevitable component peripheral to implementa-
tion is a critical element of sustainability. Additionally,
inter-organizational relationships developed during the
HIV-STIC study strengthened the partnership between
multiple organizations and facilitated the communication
of organizational values and missions, which in turn led to
alignment of practices and eventually better quality of
care.
There is a dearth of research investigating the factors
that influence sustainability of health practices. The
current findings showed that the sustainability of health
services is contingent on organizational endorsement
(including administrative and staff buy-in), staff con-
tinuity, and having a champion driving the implemented
services, whereas a mismatch between intervention and
organizational priorities, a lack of resources, and staff
turnover served as barriers to sustaining practices. Ac-
cordingly, the lack of sustainability in three sites in this
study was linked to one or more of several factors:
the incompatibility of the implemented services with
organizational priorities, staff turnover (especially among
those who had participated in the intervention), and lack
of funding to sustain the implemented services.
Organizational endorsement at multiple levels is likely
the principal factor that facilitates sustainability. Several
sites identified that the buy-in and support from both
administrators and staff were crucial to maintain the
new or improved HIV services. When the value of prac-
tices was salient to administrators or congruent with the
organizational mission, administrators tended to buy-in
and put efforts in place to sustain the practices. The
buy-in of the staff, particularly those who had been en-
gaged in the implementation process, also facilitated sus-
tainability of the intervention because they actually
served as the front-line workforce who continued those
practices during the post-implementation period.
The sustainability of implemented services depends on
the congruence with organizational priorities. We found
a lack of sustainability for sites where organizations set
different priorities than goals of the implemented ser-
vices. In particular, all three sites which did not continue
implemented services did not view the services as a core
component of the staff's job responsibilities. Therefore,
the compatibility of organizational priorities must be
considered in order to ensure the applicability of imple-
mentation outcomes across a range of settings (Proctor
et al. 2011).
Having an administrative-level champion who maneu-
vers in a dynamic, complex organizational structure and
drives forward the sustainability of implemented prac-
tices is also important. In the sites where practices were
sustained, the executive sponsor either directly requested
the scaling up of practices to a broader system or stra-
tegically disseminated those practices (e.g., making the
implemented practices part of existing agency policy).
This is consistent with previous research indicating that
having a champion with a managerial position who ad-
vocates for the intervention is necessary to maintain
changes (Goodson et al. 2001; Greenhalgh et al. 2004;
Wandersman et al. 2000).
One of the most commonly cited factors that hinder
service sustainability is the availability of resources, par-
ticularly the project funding (Blasinsky et al. 2006; Wiig
et al. 2010), which also emerged in the current study. A
deficiency in funding and issues with staffing, particu-
larly prominent in sites which discontinued the imple-
mented services, resulted in a lack of sustainability for
the implemented HIV services. With staff turnover and
work overburden, there was a lack of human resources
to effectively continue the implemented practices, which
was in turn detrimental to service sustainability. Staff
who had been trained during the implementation played
a critical role in sustaining the implemented practices.
Another interesting, but rarely discussed outcome in the
sustainability literature is the sustainability of implementation
strategies. In addition to the endurance of actual implemen-
tation outcomes, several sites have reported that they have
extended or planned to extend the LCT model to improve
services designed for other health-related problems.
This indicates that stakeholders have not only acknowl-
edged the value of improved HIV services and practices in
a correctional setting but also adopted the organizational
approach for implementing the practices. This finding is
consistent with Burnes and Jackson's (2011) argument that
the success of interventions relies on the acceptance of the
content of the implementation as well as the approach
used for implementation. The sustainability of the imple-
mentation strategy is particularly crucial when the avail-
ability of resources (e.g., funding, staff resources) does not
allow for the continuation of implemented practices, but
the implementation strategy or model still survives or
penetrates through the system to identify other changes
that could be made, or improve other aspects of service
delivery.
The significance of the HIV-STIC project
This paper's analysis of policy and practice changes that
were sustained as a result of the HIV-STIC change team
intervention reinforces the study's findings on the positive
impacts of the intervention on both service delivery and
staff attitudes (see Pearson et al. 2014; Visher et al. 2014).
The change teams selected a variety of HIV services for
improvement during the course of the intervention,
including increasing HIV prevention attendance among
female inmates; increasing the percentage of inmates re-
ceiving HIV education just prior to release; increasing the
percentage of inmates receiving an HIV test at admission;
increasing overall HIV testing; improving the linkage to
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 7 of 9
community treatment for HIV positive inmates leaving
prison; reducing wait times and no-shows to the commu-
nity HIV treatment provider; improving continuity of anti-
retroviral therapy medications for inmates leaving prison;
and expanding peer-led HIV prevention programs
(Belenko et al. 2013). Using a prospective meta-analytic
design, analysis of these outcomes revealed an overall
positive effect that was statistically significant, with inter-
vention facilities delivering more HIV services (prevention,
testing, and/or linkage to treatment) for offenders under
correctional supervision than the control facilities
(Pearson et al. 2014). Moreover, staff in the facilities
that implemented the change team approach for im-
proving the delivery of HIV services increased their per-
ceptions of the value of HIV services as compared to
staff in the control facilities (Visher et al. 2014). Staff in
the facilities that participated in the change team activ-
ities rated implementing HIV services in their facility as
more acceptable and feasible as compared with staff in
the control facilities. Thus, the set of results from the
current analysis indicating sustained changes in service
outcomes implemented during the HIV-STIC study
provides preliminary support for the use of a local
change team approach to implementing evidence-based
practices in criminal justice settings.
Future directions
This study was conducted between six and nine months
after the end of the implementation. However, there
might be a delay between when changes have been sus-
tained and when they can be observed. Moreover, the
persistence of implemented changes may fluctuate over
time. Future studies could look at the sustainability from
a long-term perspective and assess which aspects of the
implemented services are sustained, with a focus on how
to maximize the investment and capacity of an imple-
mentation project.
It is important to distinguish the sustainability of im-
plementation processes and strategies (e.g., interagency
relationship, LCT model) from the sustainability of ac-
tual implementation outcomes. Even though they are
two important pillars for a successful implementation,
little attention has been paid to understand the extent to
which implementation processes have been sustained and
the pertinent factors that influence that sustainability. Fu-
ture research could look at how implementation processes
are sustained as well as how the organizational adoption
of implementation processes serves as an instrument to
enhancing the quality of health services.
Abbreviations
CJ-DATS: Criminal Justice Drug Abuse Treatment Studies; HIV-STIC: HIV
Services and Treatment Implementation in Corrections; LCT: Local Change
Team; PI: Principal investigator; ES: Executive sponsor.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
CV led the development of the research plan for the sustainability substudy
and directed its implementation. YY and YP led the coding and analysis of
the interviews with SH and HS as contributors. SM conducted the interviews.
HS and JP contributed to the analysis, results and discussion, and edited
parts of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This study is funded under a cooperative agreement from the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIH/NIDA), with support from the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) and
the Bureau of Justice Assistance, US Department of Justice. The authors
gratefully acknowledge the collaborative contributions by NIDA; the
Coordinating Center, AMAR International, Inc.; and the Research Centers
participating in CJ-DATS. The Research Centers include: Arizona State University
and Maricopa County Adult Probation (U01DA025307); University of Connecticut
and the Connecticut Department of Correction (U01DA016194); University of
Delaware and the Delaware Department of Corrections (U01DA016230); Friends
Research Institute and the Maryland Department of Public Safety Correctional
Services' Division of Parole and Probation (U01DA025233); University of Kentucky
and the Kentucky Department of Corrections (U01DA016205); National Development
and Research Institutes, Inc. and the Colorado Department of Corrections
(U01DA016200); University of Rhode Island, Rhode Island Hospital and the Rhode
Island Department of Corrections (U01DA016191); Texas Christian University and
the Illinois Department of Corrections (U01DA016190); Temple University and
the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections (U01DA025284); and the University
of California at Los Angeles and the Washington State Department of Corrections
(U01DA016211). The views and opinions expressed in this report are those of the
authors and should not be construed to represent the views of NIDA nor any of
the sponsoring organizations, agencies, CJ-DATS partner sites, or the U.S.
government.
Author details
1Center for Drug & Health Studies, Department of Sociology and Criminal
Justice, University of Delaware, Newark, USA. 2Department of Psychology,
University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, USA. 3Friends Research
Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA. 4University of Connecticut, Storrs, USA. 5Center
for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research (CHOIR), Edith
Nourse Rogers Memorial VA Medical Center, Bedford, USA. 6Institute of
Behavioral Research, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, USA.
Received: 19 December 2014 Accepted: 23 February 2015
References
Aarons, G, Hurlburt, M, & Horwitz, S. (2011). Advancing a conceptual model of
evidence based practice implementation in public service sectors.
Administration and Policy in Mental Health, 38(1), 4­23.
Beckwith, CG, Zaller, ND, Fu, JJ, Montague, BT, & Rich, JD. (2010). Opportunities to
diagnose, treat, and prevent HIV in the criminal justice system. Journal of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 55(Suppl 1), S49­S55.
Belenko, S, Visher, CA, Copenhaver, M, Hiller, M, Melnick, G, O'Connell, D, Pearson,
F, Fletcher, B, & and the HIV STIC Workgroup of CJ-DATS. (2013). A cluster
randomized trial of utilizing a local change team approach to improve the
delivery of HIV services in correctional settings: Study Protocol. Health &
Justice, 1, 8. doi:10.1186/2194-7899-1-8.
Blasinsky, M, Goldman, HH, & Untzer, J. (2006). Project IMPACT: A report on
barriers and facilitators to sustainability. Administration and Policy in Mental
Health and Mental Health Services Research, 33, 718­729.
Booker, C, Flygare, C, Solomon, L, Ball, S, Pustell, M, Bazerman, L, & Spaulding, A.
(2013). Linkage to HIV care for jail detainees: findings from detention to the
first 30 days after release. AIDS and Behavior, 17(Suppl 2), 128­136.
Burnes, B, & Jackson, P. (2011). Success and failure in organizational change: an
exploration of the role of values. Journal of Change Management,
11(2), 133­162.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2003). Incorporating HIV prevention
into the medical care of persons living with HIV: Recommendations of CDC,
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 8 of 9
the Health Resources and Services Administration, the National Institutes of
Health, and the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. MMWR, 52(RR-12), 1­24.
Dopson, S, Fitzgerald, L, Ferlie, E, Gabbay, J, & Locok, L. (2002). No magic targets:
changing clinical practice to become more evidence based. Health Care
Management Review, 27, 35­47.
Ducharme, LJ, Chandler, RK, & Wiley, TR. (2013). Implementing drug abuse
treatment services in criminal justice settings: Introduction to the CJ-DATS
study protocol series. Health & Justice, 1, 5. doi:10.1186/2194-7899-1-5.
Fitzgerald, L, Ferlie, E, Wood, M, & Hawkins, C. (2002). Interlocking interactions,
the diffusion of innovations in health care. Human Relations, 55, 1429­1449.
Goisman, RM, Warshaw, MG, & Keller, MB. (1999). Psychosocial treatment
prescriptions for generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
phobia, 1991­1996. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156(11), 1819­1821.
Goodson, P, Smith, MM, Evans, A, Meyer, B, & Gottlieb, NH. (2001). Maintaining
prevention in practice survival of PPIP in primary care settings. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 20(3), 184­189.
Greenhalgh, T, Robert, G, Macfarlane, F, Bate, P, & Kyriakidou, O. (2004). Diffusion
of innovations in service organizations: Systematic review and
recommendations. Milbank Q, 82, 581­629.
Grimshaw, JM, Eccles, MP, Lavis, JN, Hill, SJ, & Squires, JE. (2012). Knowledge
translation of research findings. Implementation Science, 7, 50.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-50.
Hendricks Brown C (2014). Construction of an implementation science for scaling
out interventions. Accessed at http://www.slideshare.net/HopkinsCFAR/
construction-of-an-implementation-science-for-scaling-out-interventions.
Maruschak, L. (2012). HIV in Prisons, 2001­2010. (NCJ 228307). Washington, DC: U.S
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
McHugh, RK, & Barlow, DH. (2010). The dissemination and implementation of
evidence-based psychological treatments: a review of current efforts. American
Psychologist, 65(2), 73­84.
Michie, S, Fixsen, D, Grimshaw, J, & Eccles, MP. (2009). Specifying and reporting
complex behaviour change interventions: the need for a scientific method.
Implementation Science, 4, 40. doi:10.1186/1748-5908-4-40.
Pearson, F, Shafer, MS, Dembo, R, Vega-Debién, G, Pankow, J, Duvall, JL, Belenko,
S, Frisman, LK, Visher, CA, Pich, M, & Patterson, Y. (2014). Efficacy of a process
improvement intervention on delivery of HIV services: A multi-site trial. Am J
of Public Health, 104(12), 2385­2391.
Proctor, EK, Landsverk, J, Aarons, G, Chambers, D, Glisson, C, & Mittman, B. (2009).
Implementation research in mental health services: an emerging science
with conceptual, methodological, and training challenges. Administration and
Policy in Mental Health, 36, 24­34.
Proctor, EK, Silmere, H, Raghavan, R, Hovmand, P, Aarons, G, Bunger, A, & Hensely,
M. (2011). Outcomes for implementation research: conceptual distinctions,
measurement challenges, and research agenda. Administration and Policy in
Mental Health, 38, 65­76.
Scheirer, MA, & Dearing, JW. (2011). An agenda for research on the sustainability
of public health programs. Am J of Public Health, 11, 2059­2067.
Schell, SF, Luke, DA, Schooley, MW, Elliott, MB, Herbers, SH, Mueller, NB, & Bunger,
AC. (2013). Public health program capacity for sustainability: a new
framework. Implementation Science, 8, 15. doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-15.
Springer, SA, & Altice, FL. (2005). Managing HIV/AIDS in correctional settings.
Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 2(4), 165­170.
Stewart, RE, & Chambless, DL. (2007). Does psychotherapy research inform
treatment decisions in private practice? Journal of Clinical Psychology,
63, 267­281.
Visher, CA, Hiller, M, Belenko, S, Pankow, J, Dembo, R, Frisman, LK, Pearson, FS,
Swan, H, & Wiley, TRA. (2014). The effect of a local change team intervention
on staff attitudes towards HIV service delivery in correctional settings: a
randomized trial". AIDS Education and Prevention, 26, 411­428.
Wandersman, A, Imm, P, Chinman, M, & Kaftarian, S. (2000). Getting to outcomes:
A results-based approach to accountability. Evaluation and Program Planning,
23, 389­395.
Wiig, J, Cocozzo, JJ, Morris, JL, Shufelt, JL, & Skowyra, KR. (2010). Sustaining
Change: A Models for Change Guidebook. Child Welfare League of America.
Washington DC: National Center for Mental Health and Juvenile Justice/
Technical Assistance Collaborative Inc.
Wiltsey Stirman, S, Kimberly, J, Cook, N, Galloway, A, Castro, F, & Carns, M. (2012).
The sustainability of new programs and innovations: a review of the
empirical literature and Recommendations for future research.
Implementation Science, 7, 17. doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-17.
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and benefit from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the field
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
Visher et al. Health and Justice (2015) 3:5 Page 9 of 9
