Discussion Paper
Deutsche Bundesbank
No 08/2015
Securities trading by banks
and credit supply: micro-evidence
Puriya Abbassi
(Deutsche Bundesbank)
Rajkamal Iyer
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
José-Luis Peydró
(ICREA-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Cass Business School, CREI, Barcelona GSE and CEPR)
Francesc R. Tous
(Unversitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona and Deutsche Bundesbank)
Discussion Papers represent the authors` personal opinions and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.
Editorial Board: Daniel Foos
Thomas Kick
Jochen Mankart
Christoph Memmel
Panagiota Tzamourani
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978­3­95729­1­ (Printversion)
ISBN 978­3­95729­­ (Internetversion)
Non-technical summary
Research question
The role of securities trading by banks has assumed significant importance in the modern
financial system. Commercial banks today hold a significant amount of securities in their asset portfolio.
In the aftermath of the recent financial crisis, there is considerable debate both in academic and policy
circles about the implications of security trading by banks' for credit supply and securities markets. A
recurrent argument has been that securities trading activities by banks in the crisis have led to a reduction
in credit supply. Moreover, there have been several policy initiatives to impose some restrictions on
banks' trading activities as there are claims that weak banks take excessive risk through securities trading
(Volcker rule in USA, the Liikanen Report in the European Union and the Vickers Report in the UK).
However, empirical analysis is scant due to the lack of comprehensive micro datasets.
Contribution
In this paper, we empirically analyze securities trading by banks, and the associated spillovers to
the supply of credit to the real sector. We use the German securities' register that contains information on
investments made by German banks at the security level as well as the German credit register with
information on the credit given by German banks to each firm. The main testable hypothesis, which we
examine is that banks with trading expertise will increase their investments in securities during the crisis,
especially in those securities that had a (larger) drop in price, to profit from the trading opportunities,
thereby withdrawing funds from lending.
Results
We find that, during the crisis, banks with trading expertise increase their overall investments in
securities, especially in those that had a larger price drop. The quantitative effects are largest for trading
banks with higher capital and in securities with lower rating and longer maturity. In fact, there are no
differential effects for triple-A securities. Moreover, banks with trading expertise reduce their overall
supply of credit in crisis times ­ i.e., for the same borrower at the same time, trading banks reduce lending
relative to other banks. The credit reduction is stronger for trading banks with higher capital and is
binding at the firm level. All these differential effects for trading banks are not present outside the crisis
period. The use of detailed micro data allows us to control for a number of characteristics that deal with
several other interpretations, which makes our results robust. Our results suggest that during a crisis,
security-trading activities can crowd out lending. However, at the same time, we also find that banks buy
securities that have a larger drop in price, especially in long-term and low rated securities, in turn acting
as risk absorbers.
Nichttechnische Zusammenfassung
Forschungsfrage
Die Rolle des Wertpapierhandels der Banken hat in dem modernen Finanzsystem an Bedeutung gewonnen.
Die Geschäftsbanken halten heute eine erhebliche Menge an Wertpapieren in ihrem Anlagebestand. Nach der
jüngsten Finanzkrise entstand sowohl in akademischen als auch in politischen Kreisen eine tiefgreifende Debatte
darüber, wie der Wertpapierhandel der Banken auf deren Kreditvergabe und die Wertpapiermärkte wirken würde.
Hierbei wurde stets argumentiert, dass die Wertpapierhandelsaktivitäten der Banken zu einer Verringerung der
Kreditversorgung in der Krise geführt haben. Darüber hinaus gab es mehrere Initiativen, die Handelsaktivitäten der
Banken einzuschränken, da vermutet wurde, dass gerade schwache Banken durch den Wertpapierhandel geneigt
sein könnten, übermäßige Risiken einzugehen (Volcker-Regel in den USA, der Liikanen-Bericht in der
Europäischen Union und der Vickers-Bericht in Großbritannien). Evidenzbasierte Studien hierzu sind allerdings
aufgrund mangelnder umfassender Mikrodatensätze kaum vorhanden.
Beitrag
In diesem Papier untersuchen wir empirisch den Wertpapierhandel der Banken und analysieren die damit
verbundenen Konsequenzen für die Kreditvergabe an die Realwirtschaft. Wir nutzen dazu die Statistik über
Wertpapierinvestments, die Informationen über Investitionen deutscher Banken auf Wertpapierebene ausweist,
sowie das deutsche Kreditregister (MiMiK), das Informationen über die Kreditvergabe deutscher Banken an
Unternehmen widerspiegelt. Unsere zugrundeliegende Hypothese lautet, dass Banken mit eingehender Erfahrung im
Handelsgeschäft in der Krise vor allem in Wertpapiere investieren, deren Kurse überdurchschnittlich gefallen sind,
um von möglichen Werterholungen zu profitieren, und dabei ihre Kreditvergabe reduzieren.
Ergebnisse
Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen, dass während der Krise Banken mit eingehender Handelserfahrung ihre
Wertpapierinvestitionen insgesamt erhöhen, vor allem aber ihre Anlagen in Wertpapieren, für die ein größerer
Preisrückgang zu beobachten war. Diese Ergebnisse scheinen quantitativ besonders stark für die Banken mit
eingehender Handelserfahrung zu sein. Weiterhin scheinen Wertpapiere mit niedrigerem Rating und längerer
Laufzeit bei diesem Ergebnis im Vordergrund zu stehen, denn wir finden keine Effekte für Triple-A bewertete
Wertpapiere. Darüber hinaus beobachten wir für Banken mit eingehender Handelserfahrung eine Reduktion ihrer
aggregrierten Kreditvergabe in der Krisenperiode ­ d.h. für den gleichen Kreditnehmer zum gleichen Zeitpunkt
reduzieren Banken mit eingehender Handelserfahrung ihre Kredite mehr als andere Banken. Hier finden wir
ebenfalls, dass der Rückgang der Kreditvergabe insbesondere bei Banken mit eingehender Handelserfahrung und
erhöhter Kapitalausstattung vorliegt und diese auf Unternehmensebene bindend sind. Diese Ergebnisse für
handelserfahrene Banken werden nicht außerhalb der Krisenzeit beobachtet. Unsere robusten Ergebnisse legen nahe,
dass in der Krise Wertpapierinvestmentaktivitäten die Kreditvergabe `verdrängen' (`crowding out'). Jedoch muss
auch festgestellt werden, dass diese Banken mit dem Kauf langlaufender Wertpapiere oder solcher mit niedriger
Bonität oder solcher, die zuvor im Kurs gefallen sind, dämpfend auf die Märkte wirken.
Securities Trading by Banks and Credit Supply: Micro-Evidence
Puriya Abbassi Rajkamal Iyer José-Luis Peydró Francesc R. Tous*
Abstract
We analyze securities trading by banks and the associated spillovers to the supply of credit.
Empirical analysis has been elusive due to the lack of securities register for banks. We use
a unique, proprietary dataset that has the investments of banks at the security level for
2005-2012 in conjunction with the credit register from Germany. Analyzing data at the
security level for each bank in each period, we find that during the crisis, banks with higher
trading expertise increase their overall investments in securities, especially in those that had
a larger price drop. The quantitative effects are largest for trading-expertise banks with
higher capital and in securities with lower rating and long-term maturity. In fact, there are
no differential effects for triple-A rated securities. Moreover, banks with higher trading
expertise reduce their overall supply of credit in crisis times ­ i.e., for the same borrower at
the same time, trading-expertise banks reduce lending relative to other banks. This effect is
more pronounced for trading-expertise banks with higher capital, and the credit reduction is
binding at the firm level. Finally, these differential effects for trading-expertise banks are
not present outside the crisis period.
JEL codes: G01, G21, G28.
Keywords: banking, investments, bank capital, credit supply, risk-taking.
* This version is from February 2015. Puriya Abbassi: Bundesbank, puriya.abbassi@bundesbank.de;
Rajkamal Iyer: MIT, riyer@mit.edu; José-Luis Peydró: ICREA-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Cass Business
School, CREI, Barcelona GSE, CEPR, jose.peydro@upf.edu; Francesc R. Tous: UPF and Bundesbank,
francesc.rodriguez@upf.edu. We are extremely thankful to Jeremy Stein for his comments and suggestions,
and we also thank Nittai Bergman, Jean-Noel Barrot, Markus Brunnermeier, Mathias Dewatripont, Douglas
Diamond, Xavier Freixas, Marcel Gorenflo, Stefan Gissler, Xavier Giroud, Zhiguo He, Leonid Kogan,
Christian Laux, Christian Leuz, Debbie Lucas, Andrey Malenko, Elena Manresa, Stefanie von Martinez,
Sergio Mayordomo, Christoph Memmel, Atif Mian, Jun Pan, Jonathan Parker, Michael Schmidt, Antoinette
Schoar, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Leonid Silbermann, Suresh Sundaresan, Adrien Verdelhan, Annette
Vissing-Jørgensen, Björn Wehlert, and seminar participants at MIT, UPF, CREI, Universitad de Navarra,
Imperial College, Deutsche Bundesbank, EBRD, ECB, Banque de France, Bank of England, NBER Corporate
Finance meetings, and BCBS-CEPR-JFI `Banking and Regulation: the Next Frontier' workshop in Basel. We
thank Santeri Niemelä for his excellent research assistance. Peydró acknowledges financial support from
project ECO2012-32434 of the Spanish Ministry of Economics and Competitiveness. The views expressed in
the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Bundesbank or the
Eurosystem.
BUNDESBANK DISCUSSION PAPER NO 08/2015

1. Introduction
The role of securities trading by banks has assumed significant importance in the
modern financial system (Langfield and Pagano, 2014). Commercial banks today hold a
significant amount of securities in their asset portfolios (e.g., 20% in the US and 19% in
Germany). In the aftermath of the financial crisis, there is considerable debate both in
academic and policy circles about the implications of securities trading by banks for credit
supply and securities markets. A recurrent argument is that during the crisis, banks'
securities trading activities led to a reduction in credit supply (Stein, 2013).1
Moreover,
there have been several policy initiatives to impose restrictions on banks' trading activities
(the Volcker rule in the US, the Liikanen Report in the EU, and the Vickers Report in the
UK). However, empirical analysis is scant due to the lack of comprehensive micro datasets
on securities holdings by banks in conjunction with bank credit ­ i.e., both security and
credit registers for banks. In this paper, we empirically analyze securities trading by banks
and the associated spillovers to the supply of credit to the real sector.
On the theoretical front, there is a growing literature that analyzes the role of
securities trading by banks and its implications for credit supply and securities markets.
Diamond and Rajan (2011) show that during a crisis, fire sales in securities markets can
lead banks that have higher expertise in securities trading to increase their investment in
securities and reduce the supply of credit to the real sector. In effect, they argue that in the
presence of funding constraints, banks with trading expertise may reduce credit supply as
they withdraw funds from lending to profit from trading opportunities. Shleifer and Vishny
(2010) show that during a crisis, as a result of fire sales in securities markets, the returns
from investing in distressed securities are higher than the returns from lending. In sum,
these theories highlight an externality, from security investments of banks during a crisis to
a reduction in the supply of credit to the real sector.
Despite the importance for theory and policy of understanding banks' securities
investments during a crisis and its implications for credit supply, the empirical analysis has

1
"Adverse spillovers from a fire sale of this sort may also take the form of a credit crunch that affects
borrowers more generally. Such a credit crunch may arise as other financial intermediaries (e.g., banks)
withdraw capital from lending, so as to exploit the now-more-attractive returns to buying up fire-sold assets.
Ultimately, it is the risk of this credit contraction, and its implications for economic activity more broadly,
that may be the most compelling basis for regulatory intervention" Jeremy C. Stein, Governor of the Federal
Reserve Board.
1

been elusive. The main constraint that has hampered empirical research is the lack of
comprehensive micro data at the security level on banks' trading activities. Comparing
aggregate data on banks' securities holdings does not present a precise, clear picture of
investment behavior as it does not take into account the time-varying, unobservable
heterogeneity in security characteristics (e.g., risk, liquidity, outstanding volumes, etc.).2
In this paper, we use a unique, proprietary dataset from the Bundesbank (the
German central bank) that provides information on security-level holdings for all banks in
Germany, a bank-dominated system, at a quarterly frequency for the period between 2005
and 2012. Each security is also matched with security-level information, notably price,
rating, coupons, and maturity. Importantly, not only do we have the security-level holdings
of each bank, but also the credit register containing information on the individual loans
made by banks. The security and credit registers are matched with comprehensive bank
balance sheet information.
The main testable hypothesis, which we motivate in the paper with a simple,
stylized theoretical model, is that during a crisis, banks with higher trading expertise will
increase their investments in securities, especially in securities that had a (larger) price drop,
to profit from the trading opportunities, thereby withdrawing funds from lending. To
examine this channel, we first examine the investment behavior of banks that are most
active in securities markets. The idea being that banks that are generally active in securities
markets are better at identifying trading opportunities during a crisis, as compared to other
banks that do not routinely engage in high levels of securities trading. To proxy for active
presence and expertise in securities markets, we use membership of banks to the largest
fixed-income trading platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), as banks that trade actively
would have direct membership rather than use an intermediary. We also further analyze
heterogeneous effects based on bank capital and security characteristics, notably rating and
maturity.
For identification, we analyze the data at the security-quarter-bank level and
include security*time fixed effects to account for the unobserved time-varying
heterogeneity across securities, e.g., risk, liquidity, outstanding volumes, etc. Thus, we

2
Aggregate data may show that two banks have very similar overall level of security investments, however,
risk, maturity, coupons, and other characteristics of these securities could be very different. Moreover, in
crisis times, as some securities are more affected than others (even within a same rating category),
comparison of bank holdings even within the same rating category using aggregate data becomes difficult.
2

examine the changes in level of holdings for the same security at the same time by different
banks. Furthermore, to isolate compositional effects (based on security price changes), we
can include bank*time (or bank) fixed effects to control exhaustively for time-varying
heterogeneity across banks. Finally, we identify the associated lending behavior of banks
by analyzing borrower-quarter-bank level data and controlling for time-varying,
unobserved firm fundamentals that proxies for credit demand using borrower*time fixed
effects (see, e.g., Khwaja and Mian, 2008). Thus, we compare lending by different banks to
the same firm during the same time period.
In crisis times, we find that banks with higher trading expertise ("trading banks")
increase their level of security investments as compared to other banks ("non-trading
banks").3
Trading banks especially buy more of the securities that had a larger drop in price.
Moreover, the investment in securities that had a larger drop in price is primarily
concentrated in lower-rated and long-term securities.
FIGURE 14
(a) Market price of a seven-year JP Morgan note (b) Securities holdings of the seven-year JP Morgan note
The investment behavior of banks can be illustrated by the following example. One
can see from Figure 1 (left panel) that after the failure of Lehman Brothers in September

3
For trading banks, securities as a fraction of total assets increases from 19% in the pre-crisis period to 23%
during the crisis, whereas there is no significant change for non-trading banks. Note that securities as a
fraction of total assets for non-trading banks are not trivial (18% on average), though these banks buy and sell
a substantially lower fraction of their securities in each period as compared to trading banks. We define the
crisis period starting in the third quarter of 2007, when banking problems surfaced, to the last quarter of 2009,
when Germany came out of the economic recession.The results are not sensitive to the way we define crisis
period.
4
Subfigure (a) shows the monthly price development of the seven-year JP Morgan medium-term floating rate
note. Subfigure (b) depicts the euro-denominated holdings (in millions) of this security by trading banks and
non-trading banks. The first vertical line refers to the start of the financial crisis in 2007:Q3, and the second
vertical line denotes 2009:Q4, the end of the crisis in Germany.
85 90 95 100
2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
150 200 250 300 350
2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
Trading banks Nonítrading banks
3

2008, there is a sharp drop in the price of JP Morgan medium-term note (falls from 100 to
85 Euro cents). Around this period, German banks with higher trading expertise increase
their holdings of this JP Morgan note (right panel). After the price rebounds back to 100
over the subsequent quarters, they reduce their holdings.5
In contrast, other banks do not
increase their holdings around the Lehman crisis (dashed line).
While trading banks in general buy more of securities that had a larger fall in price,
we also find that the capital level of banks plays an important role. The level of investments
in securities is increasing in the level of capital for trading banks. Furthermore, trading
banks with a higher level of equity capital buy a greater volume of securities that had a
larger price drop in the previous quarter. We then examine how these effects vary based on
credit ratings and maturity. We find the strongest quantitative impact of capital on
investments for securities with credit ratings below triple-A and with residual maturity
higher than one year. In fact, we do not find differential effects for triple-A rated securities.
These effects are robust to inclusion of bank*time fixed effects that control for overall
time-varying heterogeneity in bank characteristics.
Moreover, we also find that the prices of securities revert over the subsequent
quarters. Thus, trading banks invest more in securities with higher ex-ante yield (proxied by
previous fall in price, especially in securities with lower ratings and long-term maturity)
and obtain higher ex-post returns. Finally, during the crisis we do not find any significant
differences in selling behavior across securities that had a larger drop in price, either based
on trading expertise or on the level of bank capital. We also find that banks sell more of
securities where they have higher accumulated losses. This effect is more pronounced for
non-trading banks with a higher level of capital.
While we find that trading banks invest more in securities that had a larger price
drop, a crucial question that arises is whether this has any spillovers on the supply of credit
to the real economy. One could be concerned that trading banks lend to corporate
borrowers who have different fundamentals such as risk, size, and growth opportunities.
We use borrower*time fixed effects to control for time-varying, unobserved borrower
fundamentals that proxies for credit demand. Thus, we examine ­ at the same time for the
same borrower ­ whether there is differential lending behavior by banks based on their

5
See also Figure A1 in the Appendix for investments in Greek government bonds by trading and non-trading
banks. We find increasing investments by trading banks in these securities at the point when CDS spreads of
Greece were widening.
4

trading expertise. In addition, given that for trading banks, capital significantly affects the
level of securities investment, we also examine whether the level of bank capital matters for
the supply of credit to firms.
We find that trading banks decrease their supply of credit to non-financial firms
during the crisis as compared to other banks ­ i.e., for the same borrower at the same time,
trading banks reduce lending relative to other banks. Furthermore, there is a larger drop in
credit supply by trading banks with a higher level of capital. That is, for trading banks, a
higher level of capital is associated with a larger reduction in lending as compared to other
banks. These results are the mirror opposite of results for security investments by banks
with trading expertise.6
The results are robust to the inclusion of bank*firm fixed effects (in addition to
firm*time fixed effects) to account for time-invariant bank characteristics and bank-firm
relationships.7
In addition, controlling for accumulated gains/losses on banks' existing
securities portfolio (which controls for potential hangover of losses on existing investments
or profits from trading in the crisis) does not alter the results. In fact, we find that banks
with higher unrealized gains on existing investments lend less than other banks. The
previous finding and the finding that trading banks with a higher level of capital decrease
their lending by more while investing more in securities that had a larger drop in price are
more consistent with the securities channel crowding out credit rather than the accumulated
losses channel.8
We also do not find any differences in the subsequent default rates for borrowers
between trading and non-trading banks. Thus, there is no differential risk-taking in terms of
lending associated with banks based on trading expertise. Moreover, the results on credit
availability are binding at the firm level, which suggests that firms cannot compensate for

6
As discussed later in the model, and also in other papers cited in this Introduction, during a crisis, in the
presence of funding constraints, increasing investment in securities by some banks can lead to a reduction in
credit supply by these banks.
7
We also find that the main bank coefficient is almost identical in value (and statistically not different) if we
do not control for borrower*time fixed effects, despite that the R-squared decreases by almost 40 points. This
suggests that the covariance between bank characteristics (trading and capital) and unobserved firm
fundamentals is zero.
8
If hangover of losses on existing investments was the main reason for lower credit supply, one would expect
the overall effect of trading banks on credit reduction to be smaller (not higher) for banks with a higher level
of capital, and that banks with unrealized losses on investment to lend less (not more).
5

the reduction in credit by trading banks with credit from other banks.9
Note also that credit
from trading banks constitutes an important fraction of the total lending in the economy and,
therefore, our results could have important macro effects. Finally, in contrast to the crisis,
in the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods, all the main effects of trading versus non-trading
banks are not present for credit and investments.10
We examine several potential alternative channels (see robustness section) and find
that the above results are most consistent with trading banks increasing their investments in
securities during the crisis to profit from the trading opportunities, which results in
crowding out of credit supply by five percentage points.11 We find that the average realized
returns (annualized) on investments made, especially after the failure of Lehman Brothers,
are approximately 12.5% over the next year.12
The finding that banks with higher capital
buy more of securities that had a larger price drop is consistent with these banks having
higher risk-bearing capacity to absorb negative shocks in case the price of securities drops
below their purchase price.
Our results contribute to the literature that shows that securities trading by banks
during a crisis can affect credit supply (Shleifer and Vishny, 2010; Diamond and Rajan,
2011). Given that we find that banks with higher trading expertise withdraw funds from
lending, our results also contribute to the literature that analyses liquidity provision by
private intermediaries to firms and the role of government intervention (Holmstrom and
Tirole, 1998). In addition, our results also contribute to theories that highlight strong
synergies between the assets and liabilities of banks (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983; Diamond
and Rajan, 2001; Kashyap, Stein, and Rajan, 2002; Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2013;

9
Some of the largest firms could substitute credit with debt securities, though evidence using our dataset on
fixed-income securities does not support this. Note that Germany is a bank-dominated system with bank
credit being the main source of finance.
10
While we find that trading banks buy and sell more of securities in the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods,
they do not increase their overall investments in securities as a fraction of total assets. This is consistent with
the idea that, in general, when security prices are not very depressed (and also when funding constraints are
not binding), there is no significant crowding out of lending due to securities investment.
11
In the periodic survey conducted by ECB, most banks reported funding constraints as an important factor
affecting banking operations mainly in the middle of the crisis.
12
See Figure 4. As discussed later, we compute realized returns in several different ways and find magnitudes
between 12% and 15%. We also find that trading banks report higher net profits and income from trading,
which suggests that these trading activities are not a part of a hedge. Moreover, though we do not have the
loan rate at the loan level, the average loan rate in our credit data was approximately 5% during the crisis,
thus significantly lower than the return on securities by banks.
6

Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny, 2014).13
Our results highlight these synergies as banks
with a higher level of capital (stronger liabilities) buy riskier securities in the crisis
(securities that had a larger drop in price, especially those with long-term maturity and
lower rating).
Given our findings on bank capital and securities trading, our results are consistent
with models of financial intermediation where the capital level of banks affects asset
demand (Xiong, 2001; Gromb and Vayanos, 2002; Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009;
Adrian and Shin, 2010; He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014).
Our results suggest that in a crisis, the capital level of banks plays an important role in their
investments in securities markets. Our results suggest that trading banks with higher capital
can buy more of the securities that had a larger drop in price, especially lower-rated and
long-term securities, as higher equity capital provides buffers to absorb potential negative
shocks in these riskier securities. Moreover, the results are also consistent with models of
fire sales and lack of arbitrage capital (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992, 1997; Allen and Gale,
1994, 1998, 2005; Duffie, 2010; Acharya, Shin, and Yorulmazer, 2013).
Our results also add to the literature that examines investment behavior of banks in
sovereign debt during the European sovereign crisis (Acharya and Steffen, 2014; Battistini,
Pagano, and Simonelli, 2014; Drechsler et al., 2014).14
The main focus of these papers is to
examine risk-shifting incentives and financial repression by euro area governments.15
One
limitation of these papers is that they only have data on investments in sovereign securities
in some particular periods or only collateral posted by the banks with the European Central
Bank. In addition, these papers do not focus on credit supply during the crisis.
Finally, our results also contribute to the literature that examines the effects on
credit supply during a crisis (see e.g. Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010; Iyer et al., 2014;

13
Hanson et al. (2014) analyze synergies between bank assets and liabilities and argue that safer financial
institutions with stronger liabilities (e.g., banks with higher capital) have a comparative advantage in crisis
times at holding relatively illiquid, fixed-income assets with substantial transitory price volatility.
14
See also Becker and Ivashina, 2015 for evidence on search for yield by insurance companies.
15
These papers examine sovereign debt investments of banks during the sovereign debt crisis (corresponding
to the post-crisis period in our data). Acharya and Steffen (2014) find that weakly capitalized banks increase
their investments in risky sovereign debt consistent with risk shifting and moral suasion (using a sample of
euro area banks). Drechsler et al. (2014) examine the collateral posted by banks in the euro area to avail
liquidity from ECB and find evidence consistent with risk-shifting incentives of weakly capitalized banks.
Note, however, that these papers do not find risk-shifting behavior in the period after the failure of Lehman
Brothers. We instead find that the banks that buy securities that had a larger price drop (especially securities
with lower rating and long-term maturity) are the banks with higher capital, although these results are mainly
for the 2008-2009 period.
7

Jiménez et al., 2012, 2014). These papers document a decrease in lending by banks during
the crisis, especially those banks more exposed to the shock. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first paper that uses detailed data on both security investments and credit ­ i.e., a
security register and a credit register ­ which are crucial for comprehensive empirical
analysis of the trading behavior of banks in the crisis and the associated effects on the
supply of credit to the real sector.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the data and
the testable hypotheses using a stylized theoretical model. Section 3 presents the estimation
approach and discusses the results. Section 4 concludes.
2. Data and hypotheses
In this section we present the data and a simple model to guide the empirical
analysis.
2.1. Data
We use the proprietary security and credit registers from the Deutsche Bundesbank,
which is the micro and macro-prudential supervisor of the German banking system.16
We
have access to the micro data on securities investments of banks (negotiable bonds and debt
securities, equities, and mutual fund shares) at the security level for each bank in Germany,
on a quarterly frequency from the last quarter of 2005 to the last quarter of 2012.17
For each
security, banks report the notional amount they hold at the end of each quarter (stock of
individual securities at the end of each quarter). We use the unique International Security
Identification Number (ISIN) associated with every security to merge the data on security
investments with (i) the Eurosystem's Centralized Securities Database (CSDB) to obtain
further information regarding the issuer of the security (domicile country and sector); (ii)
Bloomberg to obtain price data (nominal currency, market price);18
(iii) FactSet to obtain
security-level information on rating, coupons, and maturity. Moreover, we supplement this
database on security investments with confidential supervisory monthly balance sheet

16
For micro-prudential regulation the responsibilities are coordinated with `BaFin'.
17
The reporting requirement specifies that securities holdings, which are passed on or acquired as part of a
repo contract, are not double-counted in the securities database. Thus, the transactions captured in analysis are
not a mechanical artifact of repo transactions. Also, securities holdings of banks in special purpose vehicles
are not reported, as these are off-balance sheet items.
18
We verified the accuracy of the price data from Bloomberg for a subset of securities using the price data
that is reported by CSDB.
8

statistics at the bank level. In particular, we collect monthly balance sheet items such as
each bank's equity capital, total assets, Tier 1 capital ratio, interbank borrowings, and
savings deposits.
Finally, we obtain data on individual loans made by banks from the German credit
register maintained by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Banks must report on a quarterly
frequency all borrowers whose overall credit exposure exceeds EUR 1.5 million. Note that
lending to small and medium-sized firms is not fully covered by this dataset. However, the
credit register covers nearly 70% of the total credit volume in Germany. The credit register
provides information on the amount of loans outstanding at the borrower level for each
bank. In addition, it also provides information on the date of default (where applicable).
The credit register, however, does not record the maturity and interest rate associated with
the loans.
The complete securities holdings data consists of all securities held by 2,057 banks
in the German banking system. We prune this data as follows. We consider only debt
securities and exclude equities and shares of mutual funds. As a fraction of total holdings of
securities, fixed income securities comprise 99% of the investments. Then, we delete the
securities for which the total holdings for the entire banking sector were below EUR 10
million.19
The resulting set of securities comprise 95% of the total holdings. We also
exclude from the analysis banks with total assets below EUR 1 billion. In addition, we
exclude Landesbanks and mortgage banks from the analysis.20
The final sample consists of
504 banks holding 89% of the securities holdings of the total banking system.
2.2. Hypotheses
Before we present the results, and as a complement to the theoretical papers we
highlighted in the Introduction, we present a simple model to guide the empirical analysis.
The main intuition behind the model is the following. In a crisis, when the expected returns
from investing in securities are high, banks with higher trading expertise invest more in
securities and cut back on credit in the presence of funding constraints (see Diamond and

19
We do this for computational reasons. These securities also account for a very small fraction of the overall
asset holdings. We also drop banks below EUR 1 billion in total assets. These banks are generally not active
in securities markets and account for a small fraction of the aggregate securities holdings and credit.
20
Landesbanks are (at least partly) owned by the respective federal state and thus considered to enjoy an
implicit fiscal guarantee. Law prohibits mortgage banks to engage in (risky securities) investments. The
results are robust to including these banks in the sample.
9

Rajan, 2011; Shleifer and Vishny, 2010).21
In addition, trading banks with higher risk-
bearing capacity (higher capital ratio) will invest even more in securities and further
decrease the supply of credit (much in line with He and Krishnamurthy, 2013). We now
proceed to a more detailed exposition.
Assume a two-period world with one security that has random returns. We denote
the security's price at    as . At   ,  can be either  or , with probability 
(without loss of generality, we assume 
 ). Banks receive a private signal at   
regarding the price of the security at   . The signal can have two values:  and . We
assume that the signal is informative:   
 
      
 
  . We
interpret the precision of the signal, , as the "trading expertise" of banks. That is, banks
that have trading expertise receive signals with lower noise.
After receiving the private signal, banks decide on how much to invest in securities
at the given price . If a bank receives a good signal, , then it buys  units of this
security (otherwise the bank does not buy any unit of the security). If the price of the
security at    is , the bank obtains the amount 
 
. The probability of this
event happening is   
   
   . The bank also obtains 
 
 with
probability   .
The bank's optimization problem can be summarized as follows:


   
 
  

 
  
   subject to the following
funding constraint: 
    
where  is the amount invested in securities,  is the credit supplied to the real economy,
and  is the available funding. The first part of the objective function is the expected
return of the risky security, the second part is the variance of this return, and the last part,
, is the payoff from the lending investment.  can be interpreted as the risk-bearing
capacity of the bank, which can come from capital constraints stemming from the market or
regulation or from risk aversion (see He and Krishnamurthy, 2012, 2013). We assume that
the budget constraint W in the model is binding during a crisis ­ i.e., banks cannot easily

21
The assumption is that expertise is required to identify profitable trading opportunities in securities market
during the crisis. See also Gorton and Metrick (2012) and Dang, Gorton and Holmstrom (2013) for papers
that argue about breakdown in trading of debt securities during a crisis due to lack of expertise to evaluate the
quality of the debt securities.
10

raise more funds to invest.22
Therefore, banks need to choose how much of their funds (W)
to allocate to investments in securities (
) and how much to allocate to lending (L).
The first order condition, assuming that the funding constraint is binding, is:

   
 
 

  
 
    
  . Solving for the
optimal 23
:   




and     

Given these optimality conditions, we obtain the following testable predictions:
Proposition 1: 

  , 

  . Banks with higher trading expertise have higher
investment in securities and reduce the supply of credit as compared to banks with lower
trading expertise.
Proposition 2: 

 ,


 . The trading ability and risk-bearing capacity reinforce
each other with regard to investment in securities and consequently, this implies further
reduction in credit supplied. Thus, the effects are reinforced with higher bank capital.
Proposition 3: 

 ,


 . A decrease in the initial security price (an increase in the
expected return) increases the overall investment in securities and decreases lending.24
Proposition 4:  

  ,


  ,


  ,


  . The effects described in
Proposition 3, both in terms of securities investments and lending, are stronger for banks
with higher trading expertise and higher risk-bearing capacity.

22
In the periodic survey conducted by ECB, most banks reported funding constraints as an important factor
affecting banking operations in the middle of the crisis.
23
To derive this equation, we have assumed linear loan returns:   . We have assumed that loans are
riskless with constant returns to scale (marginal profit equals ). Note that as long as the volatility of a loan
portfolio is sufficiently low with respect to the volatility of securities' returns, the main propositions would
hold. Note also that we take prices and returns as given in the model and ignore other equilibrium
considerations. We also assume that capital and level of funding constraints are independent (see, e.g., He and
Krishnamurthy, 2013, and Brunnermeier et al., 2012, for models that relate both).
24
To get this relation, one needs to further assume that gross returns from investing in securities are below
twice of those from investing in loans (
   

   ). To obtain an interior solution, we
also need     . The first condition,   
, is satisfied as long as the expected return in securities
is higher than the expected return in lending: 
   
 
 
. The second condition only states
that the bank needs to have enough funds to finance its investment in securities. In other words, the returns
from securities investments need to be higher than those from lending so that there is positive investment in
securities, but not too high so that there is still some lending.
11

It is important to highlight that the negative externality from securities investment
by banks to lending relies on three features: (1) an increase in expected returns from
investing in securities; (2) funding constraints; and (3) securities markets and lending
markets have some degree of segmentation (i.e., that loan rates do not adjust immediately
to be equal to security returns). See Stein (2013) and Diamond and Rajan (2011) for a
discussion of the externalities.25
To examine whether the testable predictions of the model are borne out in the data,
we analyze the crisis, when there was a sudden shock to the securities markets and there
were constraints to bank funding. We first analyze security investments by banks with
higher trading expertise and examine how it varies based on their level of capital. In
particular, we examine investments in securities that were most affected by the crisis, i.e.
those that had a large drop in price. Moreover, we identify the associated lending behavior
of trading banks and the effects based on their level of capital. Finally, we analyze these
results outside the crisis period when securities markets were less volatile and funding
constraints were lower.
3. Results
In this section, we first discuss the summary statistics. We then present the
equations that we use for the estimation along with the results for both the securities and
credit analyses. Finally, we discuss other potential alternative channels and further
robustness.
3.1. Summary statistics and initial results
Table 1, Panel A, presents the summary statistics of the portfolio holdings of banks
with (higher) trading expertise decomposed into three subsamples covering the key time
periods. We denote the period from 2005:Q4 until 2007:Q2 as the pre-crisis period, while
we define the subsample 2007:Q3 ­ 2009:Q4 as the crisis period.26
Since 2009:Q4 is the
last quarter with year-to-year negative GDP growth in Germany, we refer to the period
thereafter as the post-crisis sample. To empirically proxy for trading expertise of banks, we

25
Note that it is also difficult for banks to increase interest rates substantially to compensate for the returns
from security investments due to the risk of adverse selection and moral hazard that arise in lending (Stiglitz
and Weiss, 1981).
26
For references that the financial crisis starts in Europe in 2007:Q3, see Iyer et al. (2014) and the references
therein.
12

create a dummy that takes the value of one when a bank has membership to the largest
fixed-income trading platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange).27
The idea is that banks that
are generally more active and with higher expertise in securities trading will have
membership to the trading platform rather than using an intermediary. Supporting this
classification, we find that banks with trading expertise buy and sell a significantly larger
fraction of securities (relative to other banks reported in Panel B of Table 1). Both the
amount of securities bought and sold (as a fraction of total assets) are consistently larger for
banks with trading expertise across all the periods.
Interestingly, looking at the securities to total assets, we find that trading banks
increase their securities holdings in the crisis period. The fraction of securities to total
assets goes up from 19% in the pre-crisis period to 23% during the crisis and then comes
down to 22% in the post-crisis period. We do not find any significant difference for non-
trading banks (from 18% to 19%).28
Thus ­ unconditionally ­ trading banks on average
increase their securities holdings in the crisis period.
While the securities holdings of trading banks increase during the crisis, loans as a
fraction of total assets decreases. From the pre-crisis level of 67%, it decreases to 64% in
the crisis. In contrast, for the non-trading banks, loans as a fraction of total assets increases
from 69% to 70%. Note that, in general, the quality of loans in Germany was not bad and
also Germany had a faster recovery from the crisis as compared to other European
countries.29
All in all, the summary statistics reported above suggest that trading banks increase
their overall level of security investments in the crisis and decrease credit. These patterns
appear clearly in the data ­ i.e., comparing only trading banks across the pre-crisis and
crisis period, or comparing trading versus non-trading banks in the crisis period with
respect to the pre-crisis period.

27
Eurex Exchange is a German trading platform for bonds, repo, and other alternative asset classes.
28
Note that our classification does not exhaust the entire set of banks that have trading expertise. Thus, it is
possible that there are other banks in the group classified as non-experts that also have trading ability. This
classification bias should reduce the likelihood of us finding any significant differences across the two groups.
29
The average default rate on loans at the peak of the crisis was 1.1%. Some of the German banks (mainly
Landesbanks) experienced problems due to investments in securities originated by banks from other countries
and not from defaults arising from loans to German borrowers. As discussed earlier, we exclude Landesbanks
from the main analysis.
13

A very similar picture also emerges from a graphical representation of the main
variables of interest. Figure 3 presents the investments in securities by trading banks as
compared to non-trading banks. Trading banks invest more in securities, especially during
the crisis period. Furthermore, in line with Figure 1 (discussed earlier in the introduction)
there is a sharp spike in their security investments in the period after the failure of Lehman
Brothers. In contrast, an opposite picture emerges when we look at credit growth (Figure 4).
We see that during the crisis, trading banks decrease their credit growth relative to non-
trading banks.
Examining the composition of securities holdings of banks, we see that for trading
banks, the fraction of triple-A securities to total securities holdings decreases from 49% in
the pre-crisis period to 37% in the crisis and then increases to 55% in the post-crisis period;
instead, for non-trading banks, the fraction of triple-A securities remains stable at around
44% across the three different periods. Therefore, there are substantial differences in
composition of securities across different ratings for trading and non-trading banks. In
particular, trading banks not only substantially increase their overall securities holding
during the crisis, but they add more of non-triple-A securities.
For trading banks, the ratio of long-term securities goes up from 71% in the pre-
crisis period to 78% in the crisis (and further to 86% in the post-crisis period); instead, for
the non-trading banks, the fraction of long-term securities remains stable in the pre-crisis
and crisis periods at 78%. Thus, trading banks also buy relatively more of long-term
securities. Thus, trading banks increase overall investments in the crisis, and especially in
lower-rated and long-term securities (looking only at trading banks across periods or
comparing trading versus non-trading banks across periods).
Moreover, for trading banks, the fraction of domestic securities to total securities
decreases from 64% to 49% and increases to 57% in the post-crisis period, and the fraction
of sovereign securities held decreases from 37% in the pre-crisis period to 31% during the
crisis, increasing to 42% in the post-crisis period. Instead, for the non-trading banks, the
fraction of sovereign securities is at around 23% in the pre-crisis, 22% in the crisis period,
and at 23% in the post-crisis period, and the fraction of domestic securities is 79% in the
pre-crisis, 72% in the crisis, and further decreases to 67% in the post-crisis period. In terms
of size, trading banks vis-à-vis other banks are on average larger, and we also find that
14

during the crisis, both trading and non-trading banks increase in size.30
The average capital
ratio (equity to total assets) is 4.8% for trading banks in the pre-crisis period and remains at
the same level in the crisis (4.81%), increasing to 5.44% in the post-crisis period; for non-
trading banks, the capital ratio is 5.07% in the pre-crisis and crisis periods and 5.22% in the
post-crisis period.
In terms of the prices of securities, Figure 2 presents the evolution of prices over the
sample period. There is a wide variation in the prices of securities. We find large price
drops in the crisis period (2007:Q3 to 2009:Q4), though there is also a recovery of prices.
On average, in some quarters, the average prices of securities drop by around 20%
(annualized price change). However, there is also wide heterogeneity in the price changes
across different securities. One can see that there are hardly any significant price drops for
securities that are rated triple-A and securities with maturity lower than one year (non-
triple-A and long maturity securities have the largest price drops). This again highlights the
importance of examining investment behavior at the security level, since using aggregate
data would mask these differences and could be misleading.
3.2. Securities analysis
We now examine the investment behavior in securities using the micro data. The
summary statistics and graphs presented above suggest that in the crisis period, trading
banks increase investments in securities and decrease credit as compared to non-trading
banks. However, to understand the underlying mechanism, and for empirical identification,
one needs to analyze data at the micro level (both for securities and credit). We formally
examine the differential behavior of trading banks relative to non-trading banks using a
regression framework. Table 2 reports the results for banks' investment behavior in the
crisis period based on trading expertise.31
Before we move to the security-level data, we start by examining whether trading
banks increase their overall fraction of investments in securities relative to non-trading
banks. In column 1 of Panel A, we examine at the bank level the change in the level of
securities holdings as a fraction of total assets in the crisis period. We find that trading

30
A similar pattern is also reported (He, Khang and Krishnamurthy, 2010) for U.S banks. In all the
specifications, we control for bank characteristics.
31
In some of the estimations the number of observations varies due to missing data. However, this does not
affect the robustness of the results.
15

banks increase their level of securities holdings relative to non-trading banks over the crisis
period. This result lines up with the summary statistics and Figure 3, where we find that
trading banks increase their securities holdings in the crisis. Therefore, both conditionally
(controlling for other bank characteristics in Table 2) and unconditionally (without any
control in Table 1 and Figure 3), we find that trading banks increase their level of
investments during the crisis.
We then move on to separately examining buying and selling behavior across
securities. Our model for buying and selling behavior is at the security-quarter-bank level
(to be able to control for time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity in securities) and takes the
following form:
Log(Amountbuy/sell)ibt
=ETradingexpertiseb
+
it
+Controlst1
+
ibt
(1)
where Amount refers to the nominal amount bought (`buy') or sold (`sell') of security `i' by
bank `b' at quarter `t', 0 otherwise ­ i.e., when there is a buy, we calculate the nominal
amount by calculating the absolute difference in the holdings between quarter `t' and
quarter `t-1' and then taking the logarithm of this amount. For example, when examining
buying behavior, the dependent variable takes a positive value if the bank has a net positive
investment in the particular security and zero if there is no change in the level of holdings
or if there is a net sell of the security. We also include security*time fixed effects (
) to
control for time-varying, unobserved characteristics of individual securities.32
Note that
inclusion of security*time fixed effects controls for all unobserved and observed time-
varying heterogeneity, including all the price variation in securities, thus the estimated
coefficients are similar whether we use nominal holdings or holdings at market value as a
dependent variable.
We use equation (1) as a baseline and modify it based on the hypothesis we are
testing. In some estimations, we exploit interactions of bank variables (trading and capital)
and security variables (e.g., price variation in the previous quarter) and thus modify the
equation accordingly. Furthermore, we can also include bank (or bank*time) fixed effects
to account for time-invariant (time-varying) heterogeneity in bank characteristics.

32
The inclusion of security*time fixed effects also helps us to control ­ in each time period ­ for how much
of each security is issued and outstanding and, therefore, isolate the demand of securities. Also, when we use
security*time fixed effects, we do not control for security-level variables as these are absorbed by the fixed
effects.
16

In columns 2 and 3, Panel A, we examine, respectively, the overall buying and
selling behavior of banks at the security-quarter-bank level. We find that trading banks in
general buy and sell more of securities as compared to non-trading banks (nearly twice as
much, with a higher coefficient for buying than selling).33
These results from columns 2
and 3 further help validate our classification of banks with higher trading expertise.34
In
columns 4 and 5, Panel A, we add security*time fixed effects and find similar coefficients
as in columns 2 and 3. We also find a similar pattern when we examine buying behavior
across securities with different ratings and maturity (see Appendix, Panel A). We further
examine whether there are differences in the composition of investments, conditional on
buying (see Panel B of Table 2). Based on the theoretical model described earlier, one
would expect that, conditional on buying, banks with higher trading expertise would
selectively increase investments in securities that had a larger price drop (in the previous
period) as compared to other banks. To examine this, we estimate equation (1), restricting
the sample to securities and banks where there are only buys.
In column 1, we find that trading banks buy more of the securities that had a larger
percentage drop in price in the previous quarter (interaction of trading expertise dummy
and lagged percentage change in price). Note that we introduce bank fixed effects, in
addition to security-time fixed effects, to take into account time-invariant heterogeneity in
bank characteristics and to isolate the compositional effects of buys. In columns 2 to 5, we
analyze compositional effects depending on rating and maturity. We find that the effects are
not significant for triple-A and short-term securities, but are significant only for non-triple-
A rated securities and securities with a maturity longer than one year.
In Panel C of Table 2, we examine whether trading banks differ in the composition
of securities they sell. Panel C is identical to Panel B, the only difference being that we
examine sells. As one can see, we do not find any significant differences in selling behavior
for securities that had a larger drop in price across banks based on trading expertise. We
also do not find any compositional effects depending on rating or maturity.
While the results above show that trading banks buy more of securities that had a
larger percentage drop in price, an important question that arises is whether there are

33
We also ran the estimations where the dependent variable takes the value of one if the bank has a net
positive investment in a security and zero otherwise, and we find similar results.
34
We also find similar results for the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods, though in these periods there is no
higher overall investment in securities for trading banks, as Table 7, Panel B, shows.
17

differences in the level of investments based on bank capital. As discussed earlier, the
capital level of banks could proxy for risk-bearing capacity. In Table 3, columns 1 to 4, we
limit the analysis to banks with trading expertise. Thus, we examine whether trading banks
differ in their investment behavior based on the level of capital. In column 1, we find that
for trading banks, higher bank capital (lagged) not only implies a higher level of
investments (buys), but also the coefficient on the interaction term with previous price
change is negative and significant. Thus, trading banks with higher capital levels buy more
of securities in general, especially those securities that had a larger drop in price.35
In terms
of economic magnitudes, a one percentage point increase in capital, on average, increases
the amount of security bought by 11.1%. Furthermore, there is an additional 6.1% increase
if the security fell in the previous quarter by one standard deviation. In column 2, we
include both bank*time and security*time fixed effects to account for all time-varying
heterogeneity in bank and security characteristics.36
The results obtained are similar to those
reported in column 1.
In column 3, we include as controls the lagged cumulative gains/losses for
individual securities that are present in the banks' investment portfolios. We do not find
that banks buy more of securities where they have higher accumulated losses. In fact, we do
not find any significant effect. Moreover, the interaction term of cumulative gains with
capital is also not significant. These findings do not support the view that banks buy
securities that had a larger drop in price in an effort to increase the price of these securities
to make their existing portfolio look better. Thus, this finding is not consistent with window
dressing activities being the driver of banks' investment in securities that had a larger price
drop. Also, as discussed later, we find that banks with a higher level of capital sell more of
securities where they have larger accumulated losses in their existing investment portfolio.
In column 4, we estimate the regressions conditional on the bank buying a security. We
again find similar results to those reported earlier. In columns 5 to 8, we report the
estimations for non-trading banks. For these banks, we find that the overall level of
investment in securities is not increasing in the level of capital (column 5). The coefficient
on capital is not statistically significant. Moreover, unlike for trading banks, we do not find

35
We find similar results when we estimate the model without any bank fixed effects (not reported).
36
The results are robust to inclusion of other interactions of bank characteristics with lagged percentage
change in price. The results are also robust to inclusion of bank*security fixed effects and double clustering at
the bank and security level.
18

that higher capital is consistently associated with a higher level of investments in securities
that had a larger drop in price (column 8 is not significant). In addition, whenever it is
significant, the estimated magnitude is very small ­ the coefficient is less than one quarter
of the estimated coefficient for trading banks. We also do not find any effect of cumulative
gains/losses on existing investments on buying behavior (column 7). In column 8, when we
condition on securities where there is a buy by a bank, we do not find any relation between
the amount bought of a security that had a larger price drop and the capital level.37
In Table 4, we further examine whether the buying behavior of banks differs across
securities with different ratings and maturity. In Panel A, we report the results for trading
banks. In columns 1, 2, and 3, we find that the coefficient on the interaction term is only
significant for non-triple-A rated securities. These results show that across all categories
(except for triple-A), trading banks with a higher level of capital invest more in securities
that had a larger drop in price.
Examining the buying behavior across securities with different maturities presents a
very similar pattern (columns 4, 5, and 6). The coefficients are larger for securities with
maturities longer than one year and not significant for securities with maturity less than one
year. These results suggest that banks with a higher level of capital buy more of securities
whose prices have previously fallen, especially in investments with lower ratings and long-
term maturity. In fact, there are not significant effects for triple-A rated securities or for
securities with residual maturity less than one year.
In Panel B, we report the results for non-trading banks. Again, in line with the
results reported in Table 3, we find that the coefficient on the interaction term for capital
and percentage change in price is substantially smaller in magnitude relative to those
reported for trading banks, not statistically significant from columns 2 to 6. It is only
significant for triple-A category (column 1), just the opposite of trading banks.38
The results above capture the differential investment behavior of banks with
different levels of capital for securities. Note that most banks in Germany follow the
German local GAAP (HGB) for regulatory reporting and for reporting financial statements.
Under HGB, historical cost accounting prevails in contrast to fair value accounting (IFRS),

37
This could be because of the small sample size in this estimation coupled with the large number of fixed
effects. In fact, the cumulative gains cannot be estimated (we report the coefficients as 0.000).
38
In general, we find that relative to non-trading banks, trading-banks buy more of securities across all
different credit categories and maturities (see Appendix, Panel A).
19

which suggests that the association of capital and buying behavior is unlikely due to mark-
to-market accounting concerns (Laux and Leuz, 2010).39 
While in Tables 3 and 4 we examine the buying behavior of banks, it is also
important to examine the selling behavior to understand whether banks are reluctant to
book losses in their investment portfolios. Table 5 reports the regression results for the
selling behavior of banks in the crisis period. In columns 1 through 4, we find that there is
no significant effect of bank capital on selling behavior for trading banks. In column 3, we
examine whether trading banks sell a higher volume of securities where they have larger
accumulated gains or losses in their existing investment portfolio. We find that trading
banks do not sell a higher volume of securities where they have larger accumulated losses.
However, banks with higher levels of capital sell a higher volume of securities where they
have larger accumulated losses. However, when we estimate the results conditional on only
sells (column 4), we do not find significant effects.
Examining the selling behavior for non-trading banks (columns 5 to 8) across all
different specifications, we find that they sell more of securities where they have higher
accumulated losses. This effect is more pronounced for banks with a higher level of capital
(column 8).
The overall results show that during a crisis, banks with higher trading expertise buy
more of securities, especially those that had a larger fall in price. We also find that these
effects are stronger for banks with higher capital levels. Furthermore, the strongest
quantitative impact of capital on investments is for lower credit ratings (below triple-A) and
for securities with residual maturity higher than one year. A crucial question that arises is
whether these effects on securities trading by banks have spillovers on credit supply. That
is, whether banks with higher trading expertise while increasing their investments in
securities reduce their supply of credit to non-financial firms.

39
Under HGB, securities must be written down to the market value only when the market value falls below
the reported amortized cost (unlike mark-to-market accounting). This decrease of the market value below
historical cost has a direct impact on net income (unlike under IFRS) except when securities are placed in the
held-to-maturity category. We do not have the data on categorization for banks; however, based on some
studies (see Georgescu and Laux, 2013), for German banks, the average in held-to-maturity category is quite
low (lower than 2.17%).
20

3.3. Credit analysis
To examine whether banks with higher trading expertise reduce their supply of
credit relative to other banks, we exploit the data at the borrower-bank-time level. We use
the following estimation equation:
'Log(loancredit)jbt
=ETradingexpertiseb
+Jjt
+Controlst1
+
jbt


where the dependent variable is the change in the log of credit granted by bank b to firm j
during quarter t. We use borrower*time fixed effects (J) to control for time-varying,
unobserved heterogeneity in borrower fundamentals (e.g., risk and growth opportunities)
that proxy for credit demand (see e.g., Khwaja and Mian, 2008). Thus, we compare the
change in the level of credit for the same borrower in the same time period across banks
with different levels of trading expertise. Moreover, we also analyze the effect of bank
capital on credit supply for trading and non-trading banks. In these regressions, we can use
bank fixed effects to control for time-invariant heterogeneity in bank characteristics or
include borrower*bank fixed effects to additionally control for different banking
relationships for a firm. Finally, we also analyze whether there are implications for credit
availability at the firm level (using aggregate changes in firm credit).
In Table 6, column 1, we start with examining the lending behavior of banks based
on trading expertise and capital relative to other banks. We find that, in the crisis period,
banks with (higher) trading expertise lend less to the same borrower (firm) at the same time
as compared to other banks. The lending by trading banks is five percentage points lower
than that of non-trading banks. In column 2, we examine whether trading banks with higher
capital reduce lending by more. For banks with higher trading expertise, we find that higher
capital is associated with a larger decline in credit. Thus, consistent with the model
discussed earlier, trading banks with higher capital invest more in securities and also reduce
the supply of credit by more. Note that the coefficient of non-trading banks and capital has
the opposite sign than that for trading banks (higher capital implies more lending), although
it is not statistically significant.
In column 3, we introduce controls for other bank characteristics and find that the
coefficients reported in column 2 are almost identical and still remain statistically
significant. In column 4, we control for the accumulated losses or potential gains on the
existing security investments of banks. For instance, one could be concerned that trading
banks reduce credit supply primarily due to losses on existing investments. While this
21

argument does not explain why banks with higher trading expertise and a higher level of
capital cut back more on credit, it is still important to examine the effects after controlling
for unrealized losses or gains on a bank's investment portfolio. Again, we find that
controlling for unrealized losses or gains does not change the magnitude or significance of
the estimated coefficients.40
Interestingly, we find that banks with higher unrealized gains
on existing securities investments lend less relative to other banks (columns 5 to 7),
although the result is not robust.
While the results above compare the lending behavior of two banks to the same firm
at the same time period, one could still be concerned about borrowers matching with banks
differentially. To analyze this differential matching channel, in columns 5 and 6, we run the
estimation including bank(lender)*firm(borrower) fixed effects. The inclusion of bank
fixed effects also helps to account for all time-invariant characteristics of banks. In column
5, even after controlling for bank*borrower fixed effects, we find that trading banks with a
higher level of capital decrease supply of credit relative to other banks. Also, we find that
the main bank coefficient remains very similar in magnitude to the earlier estimations.
Moreover, in column 6, we also find that non-inclusion of borrower*time fixed effects does
not alter at all the magnitude of the coefficients on the bank capital for trading banks,
despite substantially reducing the R-squared from 64% to 27%. These results suggest that
the covariance between bank capital for trading banks (supply) and firm fundamentals
(demand) is negligible, thus suggesting that differential borrower demand arising due
unobserved matching between banks and borrowers is unlikely to be the driver of the
results. It also suggests that our main bank variable coefficients are exogenous to a large set
of unobserved borrower fundamentals (see Altonji, Elder and Taber, 2005).41
To examine whether banks differentially take incremental risk in loans, we also
examine the interaction of trading banks with future loan defaults (two years down).
Column 7 reports the results from this estimation. We find that the coefficient on the
interaction term of trading banks with future default is not significantly different from

40
The results are also robust to controlling for realized gains and losses, though given that sells are low, the
majority of gains and losses are unrealized.
41
We also estimated the regressions controlling for the loan exposures of banks to different sectors, and the
results remain unchanged (not reported). The results are also robust to double clustering at the bank and
borrower level.
22

zero.42
These results suggest that trading banks did not differentially take on more risk in
loans.
Finally, in column 8, we examine whether firms can substitute the decrease in credit
supply from trading banks by borrowing more from other banks. For instance, imagine a
firm that had two banking relationships before the crisis, one with a trading bank, and the
other with a non-trading bank. Can the firm increase the credit from the non-trading bank
and not suffer any overall restriction of credit? To examine this issue, we first create the
fraction of borrowing of a firm from banks with trading expertise before the crisis
(2007:Q2). This variable does not vary at the firm level and therefore we cannot introduce
firm fixed effects (credit change is at the firm level). In column 8, we find that for firms
with a higher fraction of borrowing from trading banks, the total change in credit is
negative and significant. Moreover, we also construct other measures of a firms' exposure
to trading banks (such as higher than 50% of the firms total borrowing, or weighted
averages based on the capital level of trading banks) and find similar results (not reported).
Note that this specification (column 8), unlike the ones reported earlier (columns 1 to 7),
does not account for firm fundamentals, but the results in previous columns suggest that the
main bank variables are not correlated with firm heterogeneity.
These results suggest that firms that were borrowing more from banks with higher
trading expertise faced a higher reduction in total credit (from banks). While we do not find
firms issuing debt securities to compensate for the reduction in bank credit, we cannot
observe whether they substitute from other sources such as trade credit. To the extent that
this is not the case, which seems plausible given that Germany is a bank-dominated system,
there could be real effects.
3.4. Further robustness
While the results above show that in the crisis period, banks with higher trading
expertise (especially the ones with higher capital) increase their investments in securities
and reduce the supply of credit to non-financial firms, analysis of the pre-crisis and the
post-crisis periods can help further shed light on the main mechanism. The main channel
highlighted in the theoretical models described earlier relies on a large shock to securities
markets (returns) during the crisis and the presence of bank funding constraints. This also

42
Loan defaults without the interaction is absorbed by the firm*time fixed effects, as we have loan defaults at
the firm-time level.
23

suggests that in periods when there are no large shocks to securities markets or bank
funding constraints are not binding, one would not expect to find similar results as in the
crisis period. Note that even if returns from investing in securities markets are high, if the
bank funding constraints are less binding, the spillover effects of higher investment in
securities on credit supply should be lower or non-existent.
In Table 7, Panel A, we examine the lending behavior of banks in the pre-crisis and
post-crisis periods. For both these periods, we do not find any significant difference in
supply of credit by trading banks as compared to non-trading banks. In addition, the
coefficient on capital for trading banks is not significant. In fact, in columns 2 and 3, for the
pre-crisis period, the coefficient is positive, although not significant at conventional levels.
Finally, there are also no significant differences in future default rates in these periods
between banks with trading expertise relative to other banks (columns 3 and 6).
In Panel B, we examine the investment in securities in the pre-crisis and post crisis
periods. While banks with higher trading expertise buy and sell more securities in general
across all the periods (see summary statistics in Table 1), we do not find them substantially
changing the proportion of investments in securities in the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods
(columns 1 and 2 of Table 7, Panel B). In the post crisis period, we see that there is some
volatility in securities markets, especially around the initial Greek crisis and also in
2011:Q2. It is interesting to note that trading banks buy into Greek bonds at the time when
their spreads are widening but before the worst moments of the Greek crisis (see Figure A1
in the Appendix).43
However, we do not find a significant reduction in credit supply relative
to other banks (also not significantly different from the coefficient in the pre-crisis period).
Note that as compared to the crisis period, when most banks report capital and wholesale
funding constraints as important factors affecting business operations, this is substantially
less the case during the post-crisis period, especially in Germany (see Bundesbank and the
ECB survey of Euro area banks).44
Also, banks equity capital base is higher, at 5.4%, in the

43
When we examine these particular quarters, we again see that there is a significant increase in securities as a
fraction of total assets for trading banks as compared to other banks. See the spike in change in total securities
for trading banks in Figure 2 for mid-2010.
44
Though the bank liquidity problems can be solved with the ECB liquidity assistance, bank capital problems
are not eliminated by ECB liquidity assistance. See Bernanke (1983) and Freixas and Rochet (2008) for
discussion on why bank capital is costly, especially in crisis times. Admati and Hellwig (2013) question part
of these costs.
24

post-crisis period as compared to 4.8% in the crisis (see summary statistics in Table 1), thus
also suggesting that capital constraints are less binding.
A crucial quantitative question is, what are the ex-post returns that banks with
higher trading expertise obtain in the crisis? To do this, we examine the average return on a
portfolio of securities formed by mimicking the investments of banks with higher trading
expertise. We create a portfolio by selecting the same securities (that had fallen in price)
and the same timing of investments. Using this method, we find that the realized returns
(annualized) on investments made after the failure of Lehman Brothers are approximately
12.5% over the subsequent quarters (see Figure 4). The realized return on investments in
securities with maturity of more than five years is higher at approximately 21% and non-
triple-A is at 15%.45
While the results above are consistent with banks with higher trading expertise
increasing their investment in securities during the crisis to profit from trading
opportunities, thereby reducing the supply of credit, we examine several other alternative
explanations. The first channel is through liquidity preference. That is, trading banks have a
preference for liquid assets like securities as compared to loans. Based on this explanation,
one should expect trading banks to buy more of securities that are liquid. However, this
explanation is difficult to reconcile with the finding that trading banks with higher capital
buy more of securities that are long-term rather than short-term and securities with lower
ratings as compared to triple-A securities. For example, trading banks invest more in Greek
sovereign debt exactly at the point when the spreads widen, which is difficult to reconcile
with a purely liquidity preference based explanation. Note that liquidity preference by itself
is not inconsistent with the banks trying to exploit trading opportunities in securities
markets. For instance, several theoretical papers (Allen and Gale, 1998; Diamond and
Rajan, 2011; Acharya, Shin, and Yorulmazer, 2013) argue that banks will hoard on
liquidity rather than lock funds into loans, in anticipation of making high returns from
acquiring securities in fire sales.46
We also investigate whether gains from trading act as a hedge against lending
income. The idea being that trading banks expect future interest rates to be low, which in

45
We assume that the securities are sold in 2009:Q4. We also estimated the realized returns using the actual
buying and selling behavior of banks. For the 2009:Q2, we find that returns are approximately 11.9%.
46
See Allen and Carletti (2008) for a recent overview of the issues.
25

turn reduces their income from lending. Therefore, trading banks may invest in securities
whose prices rise with lower interest rates, thus acting as a hedge against drop in lending
income. To examine this channel, we use the data on lending income and trading income at
the bank level from 1998 and find that they are positively correlated. This suggests that
trading income from securities does not provide a hedge against lending income declines.
In addition, while during a crisis there is generally a flight to highly rated securities, (e.g.,
holding high quality, German sovereign bonds provides a hedge), this is not generally the
case for securities with long-term maturity and lower ratings. Thus it is difficult to explain
the increase in investments in securities that had a larger price drop (especially in lower-
rated and long-term maturity) and a reduction in credit supply purely by a hedging based
explanation. The example that we discussed in the Introduction on the JP Morgan bond is
illustrative of the trading opportunities for banks with higher trading expertise to obtain
high returns on investments.
Another possible channel is that banks that have higher trading expertise buy more
of securities that had a larger drop in price due to their market making activities and hence
cut back on credit. While this explanation again suggests that banks reduce their credit
supply to profit from income from market making, the channel is different from directly
investing for trading purposes. Firstly, if market making was the main driver, one should
also find trading banks selling more of the securities that had a larger price drop (or
differential selling depending on the maturity and rating), whereas we only find results
related to buys and not to sells. Also, we do not find these effects in the other periods.
Furthermore, we find that the estimated gains from investments in securities that had a
larger drop in price are positively correlated with trading income and net profits that banks
report. This suggests that banks directly benefit from their trading activities.47
Finally, we also find similar results for investments in securities and reduction in
credit for trading banks when we use Tier 1 capital ratios. Column 1 of Panel B in the
Appendix reports the results for buying behavior of trading banks using Tier 1 capital ratios.
Similar to the results reported earlier (Table 3, column 1), we find that banks with a higher
level of Tier 1 capital buy more of securities. Furthermore, investment in securities that had
a larger price drop is increasing in the level of Tier 1 capital. We also find that trading

47
The finding that estimated gains from security investments are positively correlated with net profits that
banks report also suggests that these security investments are not simply hedges.
26

banks with higher Tier 1 capital decrease their credit supply by more (column 2). The
economic magnitudes are also similar to the ones reported earlier.48
Moreover, another
concern could be that some loans in the sample are under a model-based approach
implemented under Basel II, which came into force in Germany before the crisis period.
Thus, to make sure that the results are not driven by pro-cyclicality of lending that could
arise due to Basel II, we estimate the results excluding these loans.49
We find similar results
to those reported earlier. The estimated coefficient (not reported) on trading banks is -0.079,
and the interaction of trading expertise and capital is -0.03, both statistically significant and
slightly higher in absolute value than the ones for the whole sample in Table 6.
In sum, the results are most consistent with banks that have higher trading expertise
increasing their investments in securities to profit from the trading opportunities and
withdrawing funds from lending.50
Furthermore, banks with higher capital increase their
investments by more and also reduce their credit supply by more. We also find that the
capital level of banks plays an important role in their securities investment behavior. We
find that banks with a higher level of capital buy more of the securities that had a larger
drop in price. These results are consistent with equity capital providing buffers to absorb
risk in case the price of securities further drops below their purchase price (and affects
profits and capital).
4. Conclusion
We analyze security-trading activities of banks during a crisis and the associated
spillovers to the supply of credit. Empirical analysis has been elusive due to the lack of
comprehensive securities register for banks. We overcome this problem by using a
proprietary dataset of the investments of banks at the security-level for each bank in each
quarter for the period between 2005-2012, in conjunction with the credit register from
Germany.

48
The standard deviation of Tier 1 capital ratio is nearly twice that of the ratio of capital/total assets. Hence,
they have similar economic effects.
49
Under model-based regulation, banks report probability of default for loans using internal models, which
affects risk weights. For loans under standard approach, the risk weights are static.
50
See also Chakraborty, Goldstein and MacKinlay (2014) for evidence on banks reducing commercial
lending when the increase their mortgage lending portfolio.
27

We find that banks with higher trading expertise increase their overall investments
in securities during a crisis, especially in securities that had a larger drop in price.
Furthermore, this effect is more pronounced for banks with a higher level of capital and in
lower-rated and long-term securities. In fact, we do not find significant differential effects
for triple-A rated securities. Interestingly, the overall ex-post returns are about 12.5% for
trading-expertise banks in the crisis. In contrast to behavior in securities markets, banks
with higher trading expertise reduce their overall supply of credit in crisis times. The
estimated magnitude of decrease in lending is approximately five percentage points. The
reduction in credit supply is more pronounced for trading banks with higher capital. We
also find that the credit reduction is binding at the firm level. Given that credit from banks
with trading expertise constitutes a large fraction of overall credit in Germany, and that
Germany is a bank-dominated economy, the results suggest that this could have a
significant impact on the availability of credit to firms during the crisis at the macro level.
The question that this naturally raises is whether banks should engage in securities
trading. While there has been a move by some regulators to limit proprietary trading
activities of banks, the welfare consequences are not clear. Our results suggest that during a
crisis, securities trading by banks can crowd out lending. However, at the same time, we
also find that banks buy securities that had a larger drop in price (especially long-term and
lower-rated securities), in turn acting as risk absorbers. Importantly, the trading banks with
higher capital are the ones that buy more of these securities, which is contrary to claims that
banks with low capital engage more in risk-taking through securities investment. Thus, to
the extent that banks are large players in these markets, the results suggest that restrictions
on securities trading by banks could affect the liquidity of these markets. The lingering
questions that remain are, absent banks, would other intermediaries/governments be able to
absorb the risk and provide liquidity to the securities markets? To what extent do the
benefits associated with securities trading by banks outweigh the costs arising due to
reduction in credit supply and the potential increase in systemic risk?51
While these
questions are beyond the scope of this paper, addressing them is an important avenue for
future research.

51
See Brunnermeier et al. (2012), Saunders et al., (2014), and Freixas et al. (2015) for analyses of systemic
risk implications of bank trading activities.
28

References
Acharya, Viral, and Sascha Steffen, 2014, "The Greatest Carry Trade Ever?
Understanding Eurozone Bank Risks", Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Acharya, Viral, Hyun-Song Shin, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2011, "Crisis Resolution
and Bank Liquidity", Review of Financial Studies, 24(6): 2166-2205.
Acharya, Viral, Hyun-Song Shin, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2013, "A Theory of
Arbitrage Capital", Review of Corporate Financial Studies, 2(1): 62-97.
Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig, 2013, "The Bankers' New Clothes: What's
Wrong with Banking and What to do about it", Princeton University Press.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, "Liquidity and Leverage", Journal of
Financial Intermediation, 19(3): 418-437.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1994, "Liquidity Preference, Market
Participation and Asset Price Volatility", American Economic Review, 84(4): 933­55.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1998, "Optimal Financial Crises", Journal of
Finance, 53(4): 1245-1284.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2005, "From Cash-in-the-Market Pricing to
Financial Fragility", Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3): 535­46.
Allen, Franklin, and Elena Carletti, 2008, "The Role of Liquidity in Financial
Crises", 2008, Jackson Hole Conference Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
279-412.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber, 2005. "Selection on
Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools",
Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-184.
Battestini, Niccolò, Marco Pagano, and Saverio Simoncelli, 2014, "Systemic Risk,
Sovereign Yields and Bank Exposures in the Euro Crisis", Economic Policy, 29(78): 203-
251.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2015, "Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market",
Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
29

Bernanke, Ben, 1983, "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation
of the Great Depression", American Economic Review, 73(3): 257-76.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, "Market Liquidity and
Funding Liquidity", Review of Financial Studies, 22(6): 2201-2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, "A Macroeconomic Model of
the Financial Sector", American Economic Review, 104(2): 379-421.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Gang Dong, and Darius Palia, 2012, "Banks' Non-Interest
Income and Systemic Risk", Working Paper.
Chakraborty, Indraneel, Itay Goldstein and Andrew MacKinlay, 2014, "Do Asset
Price Booms have Negative Real Effects", Working Paper.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, 2013, "Ignorance, Debt and
Financial Crises", Working Paper.
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and
Liquidity", Journal of Political Economy, 99(3): 401-19.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001, "Liquidity Risk, Liquidity
Creation and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking", Journal of Political Economy,
109(2): 287-327.
Diamond Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2011, "Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity
Seeking, and Credit Freezes", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 557-591.
Drechsler, Itamar, Thomas Drechsel, David Marques, and Philipp Schnabl, 2014,
"Who Borrows from the Lender of Last Resort?", Working paper.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, "Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital", Journal
of Finance, 65(4): 1237-1267.
Freixas, Xavier, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2008, "Microeconomics of Banking", 2nd
edition, MIT Press.
Freixas, Xavier, Luc Laeven, and José-Luis Peydró, 2015, "Systemic Risk, Crises
and Macroprudential Policy", MIT Press.
30

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2013, "A Model of
Shadow Banking", Journal of Finance, 68(4): 1331-1363.
Georgescu, Oana, and Christian Laux, 2013, "Financial Reporting, Financial
Regulation, and Financial Stability: Evidence from German Bank Failures in 2007",
Working Paper.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, "Securitized Banking and the Run on
Repo", Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3): 425-451.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, "Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs", Journal of Financial Economics, 66: 361­407.
Hanson, Samuel G., Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny, 2014,
"Banks as Patient Fixed Income Investors", Working paper.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, "A Model of Capital and Crises",
Review of Economic Studies, 79(2): 735-777.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, "Intermediary Asset Pricing",
American Economic Review, 103(2): 732-770.
He, Zhiguo, Khang In Gu and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2010, "Balance sheet
adjustments during the 2008 crisis", IMF Economic Review 58(1): 118-156.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1998, "Private and Public Supply of Liquidity",
Journal of Political Economy, 106(1): 1­39.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2010, "Bank Lending during the
Financial Crisis of 2008", Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3): 319-338.
Iyer, Rajkamal, José-Luis Peydró, Samuel da-Rocha-Lopes, and Antoinette Schoar,
2014, "Interbank Liquidity Crunch and the Firm Liquidity Crunch: Evidence from the
2007-2009 Crisis", Review of Financial Studies, 27(1): 347-372.
Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2012,
"Credit Supply and Monetary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with
Loan Applications", American Economic Review, 102(5): 2301-2326.
31

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2014,
"Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What do 23 Million Loans Say about the Impact of
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?", Econometrica, 82(2): 463-505.
Kashyap Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, "Banks as
Liquidity Providers: an Explanation for the Co-existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking",
Journal of Finance, 57(1): 33­73.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian, 2008, "Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity
Shocks: Evidence form an Emerging Market", American Economic Review ,98(4): 1413-42.
Langfield, Sam, and Marco Pagano, 2014, "Bank Bias in Europe: Effects on
Systemic Risk and Growth", Working paper.
Laux, Christian, and Christian Leuz, 2010, "Did Fair-Value Accounting Contribute
to the Financial Crisis?", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1): 93-118.
Saunders Anthony, Schmid Markus and Ingo Walter, "Non-Interest Income and
Bank Performance: Is Banks' Increased Reliance on Non-Interest Income Bad?", Working
paper.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1992, "Liquidation Values and Debt
Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach", Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, "The Limits of Arbitrage", Journal
of Finance, 52(1): 35-55.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2010, "Unstable Banking", Journal of
Financial Economics, 97(3): 306-318.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2013, "The Fire-Sales Problem and Securities Financing
Transactions", Speech by Governor Jeremy C. Stein at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York during the Workshop on Fire Sales as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Triparty Repo and
other Secured Funding Markets, New York, October 4, 2013.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
Imperfect Information", American Economic Review, 71(3): 393-410.
Xiong, Wei, 2001, "Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets", Journal of Financial Economics, 62(2): 247­92.
32
Figures
Figure 2:
Security Prices
90 95 100 105
2006:Q1 2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
All Aaa rating
Maturity up to 1 year
This figure depicts the monthly average price (equally weighted) of all securities in our sample (black solid line) for the period from 2006:Q1 through 2012:Q4. It also shows the
average price of Aaa-rated securities (gray dashed line) and securities with remaining residual maturity below one year (gray solid line). The first vertical line refers to the start of
financial crisis in 2007:Q3, and the second vertical line denotes 2009:Q4, the end of the crisis in Germany.
33
Figure 3:
Security Holdings
.9 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
2006:Q1 2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
Trading banks Non-trading banks
This figure presents the evolution of total security holdings as a fraction of total assets (normalized to 2007:Q2). The black solid line refers to `Trading banks' and the gray dashed
line represents `Non-trading banks'. We classify a bank as a `Trading bank' (higher trading expertise) when it has membership to the largest fixed income platform in Germany
(Eurex Exchange). The first vertical line refers to the start of financial crisis in 2007:Q3, and the second vertical line denotes 2009:Q4, the end of the crisis in Germany.
34
Figure 4:
Credit Growth
-1 0 1 2 3
2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
Trading banks Non-trading banks
This figure shows the evolution of the annualized credit growth for borrowers (firms) across the sample period (normalized to 2007:Q2). The black solid line refers to `Trading banks'
and the gray dashed line represents `Non-trading banks'. We classify a bank as a `Trading bank' (higher trading expertise) when it has membership to the largest fixed income
platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange). The first vertical line refers to the start of financial crisis in 2007:Q3, and the second vertical line denotes 2009:Q4, the end of the crisis in
Germany.
35
Figure 5:
Returns from Security Investments
5 10 15 20
2007:Q1 2007:Q3 2008:Q1 2008:Q3 2009:Q1 2009:Q3
All Non-Aaa
Bbb and below Maturity above 1 year
Maturity of 5 to 10 years
This figure shows the average annualized returns from investments in securities that fell in price (in %). We compute returns by mimicking the investments of banks with (higher)
trading expertise in securities that had a fall in price. We consider the buys of the securities that have fallen in price in the previous quarter and assume that banks hold these
securities until 2009:Q4. The return for each security (at a point in time) equals the annualized percentage difference in price from that quarter in which it is purchased and 2009:Q4,
plus the coupon of the security. The average is a simple average across all securities bought in a given quarter. We do this including securities that have different ratings and maturity.
The vertical line refers to the start of the financial crisis in 2007:Q3.
36
Tables
Table 1:
Summary statistics
Panel A: Trading banks
Pre-crisis Crisis Post-crisis
Mean Std. Obs. Mean Std. Obs. Mean Std. Obs.
Securities holdings/TA 0.19 0.12 150 0.23 0.14 296 0.22 0.13 353
% Aaa securities 48.61 96.93 150 36.73 217.41 295 55.63 25.84 353
% domestic securities 64.09 27.72 150 57.60 30.24 296 49.45 53.37 348
% long-term securities 71.73 33.73 150 78.30 21.54 292 86.41 41.37 353
% sovereign securities 36.99 44.01 134 31.58 32.43 284 41.87 43.88 353
Buys/TA 0.035 0.035 150 0.039 0.046 296 0.029 0.030 353
Sells/TA 0.017 0.022 150 0.011 0.015 296 0.013 0.016 353
Loans/TA 0.67 0.13 150 0.64 0.15 296 0.61 0.15 353
Capital/TA 4.80 3.88 150 4.81 3.98 296 5.44 5.48 353
Size 16.65 1.91 150 16.80 1.88 296 16.85 1.94 353
Panel B: Non-trading banks
Pre-crisis Crisis Post-crisis
Mean Std. Obs. Mean Std. Obs. Mean Std. Obs.
Securities holdings/TA 0.18 0.11 2513 0.19 0.10 4983 0.20 0.11 5979
% Aaa securities 45.49 23.04 2281 44.13 25.02 4451 43.12 21.98 5491
% domestic securities 79.27 21.06 2503 72.39 24.99 4974 67.29 26.77 5941
% long-term securities 78.06 17.90 2502 78.12 20.13 4923 83.83 22.87 5950
% sovereign securities 23.66 19.03 1981 21.98 19.04 3634 23.14 18.67 4977
Buys/TA 0.019 0.042 2513 0.022 0.026 4983 0.015 0.018 5979
Sells/TA 0.007 0.037 2513 0.004 0.008 4983 0.003 0.007 5979
Loans/TA 0.69 0.12 2513 0.70 0.11 4983 0.68 0.12 5979
Capital/TA 5.07 1.31 2513 5.07 1.32 4983 5.22 1.34 5979
Size 14.46 0.84 2513 14.55 0.81 4983 14.65 0.78 5979
This table reports the summary statistics of the variables used in the paper, across three periods. We define
pre-crisis (2006:Q1 - 2007:Q2), crisis (2007:Q3 - 2009:Q4), and post-crisis (2010:Q1 - 2012:Q4). Panel A reports
the summary statistics for `Trading banks'. Panel B reports the summary statistics for `Non-trading banks'.
We classify a bank as a `Trading bank' (higher trading expertise) when it has membership to the largest fixed
income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange). `Aaa' refers to the rating of securities. Domestic securities
are securities where the issuer is German. Long-term securities are securities that have a remaining residual
maturity higher than one year. Sovereign securities are securities issued by countries. `Capital/TA' measures
the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b. `Size' refers to the logarithm of total
assets (in EUR thousands) for bank b. The definition of the other variables can be found in the Appendix.
37
Table 2 Panel A:
Trading behavior during the crisis
Dependent variable:
Sec/TA Buys Sells Buys Sells
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Trading bankb 5.215** 2.419*** 2.255*** 2.043*** 1.837***
(2.563) (0.571) (0.54) (0.475) (0.411)
Bank controls Y Y Y Y Y
Security*Time fixed effects N N N Y Y
Bank fixed effects N N N N N
Observations 504 248,399 258,731 248,399 258,731
R-squared 0.073 0.114 0.088 0.323 0.476
The dependent variable in column 1 is the change in Securities holdings/TA for each bank from 2007:Q2 to 2009:Q4. The dependent variable for the
`Buys' is Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which is the logarithm of the amount bought (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter t, and zero otherwise.
For the `Sells', the dependent variable is the logarithm of the amount sold (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter t, and zero otherwise.
`Trading bank' is a binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b has membership to the largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex
Exchange), and zero otherwise, which proxies for banks with higher trading expertise. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. Lagged,
time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA, Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the
main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included
(`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of fixed effects (`-'). Robust standard errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are
reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at 5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
38
Table 2 Panel B:
Buying behavior during the crisis across securities
Dependent variable: Buys
All Aaa-rated Below Aaa-rated Up to 1 Year Above 1 Year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Trading bankb*pricei,t-1
-0.231** -0.160 -0.241* 0.164 -0.248***
(0.113) (0.159) (0.138) (0.748) (0.113)
Bank controls Y Y Y Y Y
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y
Bank fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y
Observations 36,885 11,918 24,967 6,336 30,549
R-squared 0.703 0.682 0.721 0.714 0.708
The estimations report the buying behavior of banks across different securities conditional on buying. The dependent variable is Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which
is the logarithm of the amount bought (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter t. The splits are based on ratings and remaining residual
maturity of the securities. `Trading bank' is a binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b has membership to the largest fixed income platform
in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise, which proxies for banks with higher trading expertise. All regressions are estimated using ordinary
least squares. The percentage price change of security i, `pricei,t-1
', is demeaned by the sample mean and standardized using the standard deviation of
the respective subset of securities in the crisis sample. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA, Deposits/TA) are
either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant is included, but its
coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of fixed effects (`-'). Robust standard
errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at 5 percent level;
*: Significant at 10 percent level.
39
Table 2 Panel C:
Selling behavior during the crisis across securities
Dependent variable: Sells
All Aaa-rated Below Aaa-rated Up to 1 Year Above 1 Year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Trading bankb*pricei,t-1
0.073 0.159 0.057 0.162 0.058
(0.075) (0.258) (0.085) (0.188) (0.086)
Bank controls Y Y Y Y Y
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y
Bank fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y
Observations 48,546 14,682 33,864 16,055 32,491
R-squared 0.658 0.663 0.665 0.620 0.688
The estimations report the selling behavior of banks across different securities conditional on selling. The dependent variable is Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which
is the logarithm of the amount sold (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter t. The splits are based on ratings and remaining residual
maturity of the securities. `Trading bank' is a binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b has membership to the largest fixed income
platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise, which proxies for banks with higher trading expertise. The percentage price change of
security i, `pricei,t-1
', is demeaned by the sample mean and standardized using the standard deviation of the respective subset of securities in the
crisis sample. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant
is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-').
Robust standard errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at
5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
40
Table 3:
Buying behavior during the crisis based on capital
Dependent variable: Buys
Trading banks Non-trading banks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Capital/TAb,t-1 0.111* 0.027
(0.061) (0.068)
Capital/TAb,t-1*pricei,t-1
-0.061*** -0.049* -0.049* -0.061** -0.013*** -0.010*** -0.010*** -0.035
(0.018) (0.027) (0.027) (0.025) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) (0.101)
Cumulative gains/TAb,i,t-1 6.184 6.380 6.227 6.663 0.0125 0.369 0.307 0.000
(5.444) (5.817) (5.824) (13.98) (0.356) (0.356) (0.364) 0.000
Capital/TAb,t-1*Cumulative -0.166 5.776 -0.176 0.000
gains/TAb,i,t-1 (0.585) (8.482) (0.139) (0.000)
Bank controls Y - - - Y - - -
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bank fixed effects Y - - - Y - - -
Bank*Time fixed effects N Y Y Y N Y Y Y
Observations 90,167 90,167 90,167 20,088 141,430 141,430 141,430 8,051
R-squared 0.502 0.507 0.507 0.793 0.340 0.375 0.375 0.958
The dependent variable is the Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which is the logarithm of the amount bought (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter t,
and zero otherwise, and column 4 and 8 report the results of the estimations conditional on buying a security. Columns 1 to 4 report the results for trading
banks, and columns 5 to 8 for the other banks. `Capital/TAb,t-1
' measures the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in quarter
t - 1. The percentage price change of security i, `pricei,t-1
', is demeaned by the sample mean and standardized using its standard deviation in the
crisis sample. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant
is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-').
Robust standard errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at
5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
41
Table 4:
Buying behavior during the crisis across different types of securities
based on capital
Panel A: Trading banks
Dependent variable: Buys
Trading banks
Aaa-rated Aa to A
rated
Bbb-rated
and below
Up to 1
Year
1 to 5
Year
5 to 10
Year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Capital/TAb,t-1*pricei,t-1
0.023 -0.085*** -0.062** -0.037 -0.102*** -0.111***
(0.038) (0.032) (0.030) (0.045) (0.028) (0.032)
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bank*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Observations 29,037 25,791 23,860 17,615 52,182 21,603
R-squared 0.417 0.486 0.533 0.497 0.468 0.452
Panel B: Non-trading banks
Dependent variable: Buys
Non-trading banks
Aaa-rated Aa to A
rated
Bbb-rated
and below
Up to 1
Year
1 to 5
Year
5 to 10
Year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Capital/TAb,t-1*pricei,t-1
-0.086* -0.011 -0.001 -0.007 -0.010 -0.021
(0.045) (0.025) (0.005) (0.006) (0.008) (0.014)
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bank*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Observations 35,679 41,539 40,181 27,094 87,135 29,164
R-squared 0.516 0.456 0.490 0.530 0.415 0.516
The dependent variable is the Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which is the logarithm of the amount bought (in nominal value)
by bank b of security i during quarter t, and zero otherwise. The splits are based on ratings and remaining
residual maturity of the securities. Panel A shows the results for trading banks and Panel B for the other banks.
`Capital/TAb,t-1
' measures the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in quarter t-1.
The percentage price change of security i, `pricei,t-1
', is demeaned by the sample mean and standardized using
the standard deviation of the respective subset of securities in the crisis sample. All regressions are estimated
using ordinary least squares. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables
can be found in the Appendix. A constant is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are
either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-'). Robust standard errors
clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level;
**: Significant at 5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
42
Table 5:
Selling behavior during the crisis based on capital
Dependent variable: Sells
Trading banks Non-trading banks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Capital/TAb,t-1 0.011 0.013
(0.054) (0.128)
Capital/TAb,t-1*pricei,t-1
0.0002 -0.005 -0.003 0.008 -0.025** -0.003 0.001 -0.024
(0.026) (0.033) (0.033) (0.018) (0.010) (0.009) (0.008) (0.054)
Cumulative gains/TAb,i,t-1 0.054 -0.097 -0.227 -0.949 -0.248*** -0.171* -0.221* -2.391***
(0.326) (0.312) (0.328) (0.675) (0.094) (0.098) (0.130) (0.335)
Capital/TAb,t-1*Cumulative -0.136** -0.027 -0.139 -0.419**
gains/TAb,i,t-1 (0.064) (0.312) (0.119) (0.171)
Bank controls Y - - - Y - - -
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bank fixed effects Y - - - Y - - -
Bank*Time fixed effects N Y Y Y N Y Y Y
Observations 96,033 96,033 96,033 30,877 146,708 146,708 146,708 13,781
R-squared 0.537 0.542 0.542 0.722 0.639 0.678 0.678 0.893
The dependent variable is the Log(Amount)i,b,t
, which is the logarithm of the amount sold (in nominal value) by bank b of security i during quarter
t, and zero otherwise, and columns 4 and 8 report the results of the estimations conditional on selling a security. `Capital/TAb,t-1
' measures the book
value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in quarter t - 1. The percentage price change of security i, `pricei,t-1
', is demeaned by
the sample mean and standardized using its standard deviation in the crisis sample. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. Lagged,
time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA, Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the
main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included
(`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-'). Robust standard errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported
in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at 5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
43
Table 6:
Lending behavior during the crisis
Dependent variable: Change in credit
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Trading bankb -0.050* -0.061** -0.058** -0.058** -0.022***
(0.027) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.002)
Trading bankb*Capital/TAb,t-1 -0.014** -0.014*** -0.014*** -0.017* -0.018** -0.017*
(0.006) (0.005) (0.005) (0.009) (0.007) (0.010)
Non-trading bankb*Capital/TAb,t-1 0.0041 0.0039 0.0039 0.0094 0.002 0.0094
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.025) (0.028) (0.025)
Trading bankb*Future defaultj,t -0.0863
(0.070)
Cumulative gains/TAb,t-1 0.002 -0.005** -0.003** -0.005**
(0.003) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002)
Bank controls N N Y Y Y Y Y N
Borrower*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y N Y N
Bank*Borrower fixed effects N N N N Y Y Y
Time fixed effects - - - - - Y - Y
Observations 502,243 502,243 502,243 501,786 501,786 501,786 501,786 228,547
R-squared 0.499 0.499 0.499 0.5 0.642 0.272 0.636 0.003
The dependent variable from columns 1 to 7 is  Log(Credit)b,j,t
, which is the change in the log of credit granted by bank b to firm j during quarter t,
whereas in column 8, the dependent variable is the change in log of the total firm credit of firm j during quarter t by all banks. The independent variable
for column 8 is the fraction of borrowing of a firm from banks with trading expertise before the crisis (2007:Q2). `Trading bank' is a binary variable
that equals the value of one when bank b has membership to the largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise, which
proxies for banks with higher trading expertise. `Non-trading banks' is a binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b does not have a direct
Eurex Exchange membership and zero otherwise. `Capital/TAb,t-1
' measures the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in
quarter t - 1. All regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables can be found in the Appendix. A constant
is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-').
Robust standard errors clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **: Significant at
5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
44
Table 7:
Lending and Investment behavior in the pre-crisis and post-crisis period
Panel A: Lending behavior
Dependent variable: Change in credit
Pre-crisis Post-crisis
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Trading bankb -0.007 -0.007
(0.0066) (0.005)
Trading bankb* -0.001 0.014 0.012 -0.0001 -0.001 0.001
Capital/TAb,t-1 (0.002) (0.014) (0.020) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004)
Non-trading bankb* 0.001 -0.016 -0.022 0.001 -0.0001 0.006
Capital/TAb,t-1 (0.002) (0.010) (0.013) (0.001) (0.003) (0.003)
Trading bankb* 0.018 -0.004
Future Defaultj,t (0.039) (0.021)
Cumulative Gains/TAb,t-1 -0.795 -0.619 -0.933 0.273 -0.233 -0.002
0.558 (1.559) (1.930) (0.191) (0.355) (0.004)
Bank controls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Borrower*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bank fixed effects N Y N N Y N
Observations 192,051 192,051 192,051 689,124 689,124 689,124
R-squared 0.546 0.548 0.673 0.533 0.535 0.613
Panel B: Investment behavior
Dependent variable: Sec/TA
Pre-crisis Post-crisis
(1) (2)
Trading bankb -1.596 1.670
(1.559) (1.806)
Bank controls Y Y
Observations 502 501
R-squared 0.026 0.013
The dependent variable in Panel A is  Log(Credit)b,j,t
, which is the change in the log of credit granted by bank
b to firm j during quarter t. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the change in Securities/Total Assets for each
bank over the respective period. `Trading bank' is a binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b
has membership to the largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise, which
proxies for banks with higher trading expertise. `Non-trading banks' is a binary variable that equals the value of
one when bank b has not a direct Eurex Exchange membership, and zero otherwise. `Capital/TAb,t-1
' measures
the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in quarter t-1. All regressions are estimated
using ordinary least squares. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables
can be found in the Appendix. A constant is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are
either included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-'). Robust standard errors
clustered at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level;
**: Significant at 5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
45
Appendix
Figure A1:
Greek Government Bonds
(a) 5-year Greek sovereign CDS spread (in basis points)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
2006:Q1 2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
(b) Security holdings
0 .5 1 1.5
2006:Q1 2007:Q1 2008:Q1 2009:Q1 2010:Q1 2011:Q1 2012:Q1
Trading banks Non-trading banks
Subfigure (a) shows the spreads (in basis points) of a 5-year Greek sovereign CDS. Subfigure (b) reflects the total notional amount of Greek sovereign bonds as a fraction of total
assets for the period from 2006:Q1 through 2012:Q4 (normalized to 2007:Q2). The black solid line refers to `Trading banks' and the gray dashed line represents `Non-trading banks'.
We classify a bank as a `Trading bank' (higher trading expertise) when it has membership to the largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange). The first vertical line
refers to the start of financial crisis in 2007:Q3, and the second vertical line denotes 2009:Q4, the end of the crisis in Germany.
46
Table A1:
Investment and Lending behavior during the crisis
Panel A: Buying behavior across different ratings and maturities
Dependent variable: Buys
Aaa-rated Aa to A
rated
Bbb-rated
and below
Up to 1
Year
1 to 5
Year
5 to 10
Year
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Trading bankb 1.936*** 1.873*** 2.337*** 2.369*** 1.874*** 2.063***
(0.522) (0.456) (0.586) (0.460) (0.503) (0.533)
Bank Controls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Security*Time fixed effects Y Y Y Y Y Y
Observations 64,716 67,330 64,041 44,709 139,317 50,767
R-squared 0.322 0.301 0.335 0.352 0.307 0.302
Panel B: Investment and lending behavior based on Tier 1 capital ratio
Dependent variable:
Buys Change in credit
(1) (2)
Tier 1/RWAb,t-1 0.058* Trading bankb -0.065*
(0.035) (0.035)
Tier 1/RWAb,t-1*pricei,t-1 -0.024* Trading bankb* -0.008*
(0.015) Tier 1/RWAb,t-1 (0.005)
Non-trading bankb* 0.001
Tier 1/RWAb,t-1 (0.003)
Bank controls Y Y
Security*Time fixed effects Y
Bank fixed effects Y N
Borrower*Time fixed effects Y
Observations 83,635 488,726
R-squared 0.506 0.505
Panel A reports the estimations reported in Table 2, Column 4, split by different ratings and maturities. Panel
B presents the estimates of the investment regression reported in Table 3, Column 1 and the credit regression
reported in Table 6, Column 4 using Tier 1 capital ratios. See the description of the econometric specifications
in the corresponding tables. Lagged, time-varying bank controls (Size, Capital/TA, Interbank borrowing/TA,
Deposits/TA) are either included (`Y') or not included (`N'). The definition of the main independent variables
can be found in Table A2. A constant is included, but its coefficient is left unreported. Fixed effects are either
included (`Y'), not included (`N'), or spanned by another set of effects (`-'). Robust standard errors clustered
at bank level following Arellano (1987) are reported in parentheses. ***: Significant at 1 percent level; **:
Significant at 5 percent level; *: Significant at 10 percent level.
47
Table A2:
Definition of main independent variables
Variable name Definition
Trading bankb
Binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b has membership to the
largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise.
Non-trading bankb
Binary variable that equals the value of one when bank b does not have membership to
the largest fixed income platform in Germany (Eurex Exchange), and zero otherwise.
pricei,t-1 Percentage price change of security i from t - 2 to t - 1.
Capital/TAb,t-1
Measures the book value of equity as a fraction of total assets (in %) for bank b in
quarter t - 1.
Cumulative gainsb,i,t-1
Unrealized gains/losses (in EUR) as a fraction of total assets that a bank b generates
with holding the security i in quarter t - 1. We compute profits by multiplying the
change of the market-to-book ratio of security i with the amount held (in nominal
values) by bank b in quarter t - 1. We further cumulate the profits of this security
from the quarter, in which it has been purchased, until quarter t - 1.
Cumulative gainsb,t-1
Unrealized gains/losses (in EUR) as a fraction of total assets that a bank generates
from all its securities holdings on quarter t - 1. We compute this by aggregating the
cumulative gains for individual securities held by the bank (described above) at the
bank level.
Future defaultj,t Binary variable that equals the value of one when borrower j defaults on its loan at
any point in time during the lifetime of the credit contract after quarter t, and zero
otherwise.
Ratingi,t Rating of security i in quarter t, where rating equals a numeric scale of Moody's rating
codes that range from category `Aaa' through `C'.
Maturityi,t Number of months remaining (residual maturity) from quarter t onwards until security
i matures.
48
