Instability and indeterminacy
in a simple search and matching model
Michael Krause
(Deutsche Bundesbank)
Thomas Lubik
(Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond)
Discussion Paper
Series 1: Economic Studies
No 25/2010
Discussion Papers represent the authors' personal opinions and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.
Editorial Board: Klaus Düllmann
Frank Heid
Heinz Herrmann
Karl-Heinz Tödter
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Telex within Germany 41227, telex from abroad 414431
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978-3­86558­666­7 (Printversion)
ISBN 978-3­86558­667­4 (Internetversion)
Abstract:
We demonstrate the possibility of indeterminacy and non-existence of equilibrium dynam-
ics in a standard business cycle model with search and matching frictions in the labor
market. Our results arise for empirically plausible parametrizations and do not rely upon
a mechanism such as increasing returns.
Keywords:
Search and matching, indeterminacy, match elasticity
JEL-Classi...cation:
E24, E32, J64
1
Non-technical summary
In macroeconomic models where individual behavior is forward-looking, there exists the
possibility that beliefs about future economic variables can lead to aggregate self-full...lling,
or sunspot, 
uctuations. The reason for such a possibility lies in the fact that when agents
make their choices, they form rational expectations by extrapolating their behavior, and
that of the economy, into the future. In a `
regular'economic system, non-optimal choices
lead to unstable solutions that would explode or implode, just leaving one unique stable
equilibrium path as the rational, determinate, solution. In an `
irregular'system, there
are many choices agents can make today which are optimal and still not lead to explosive
solutions. In this case, there are many equilibrium adjustment paths, which is problematic
for the analysis of economic 
uctuations. Whether there is indeterminacy or determinacy
in an economic model'
s rational expectations equilibrium depends on the model'
s assumed
structure and parameter values.
The search and matching model of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) has become a
popular and successful framework for analyzing labor market dynamics in dynamic sto-
chastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models. In this article, we point out a potentially
problematic feature of this framework. We show that the solution to the dynamic model
can be non-existent or indeterminate. In particular, uniqueness problems arise when en-
dogenous matching in response to labor market pressures is not elastic enough. In such
a scenario, self-full...lling expectations, `
sunspots'
, can lead to business cycle 
uctuations.
On the other hand, a solution does not exist when matching is too elastic. While these
determinacy problems are plausible outcomes, we argue that they are not likely, as they
are associated with regions of the parameter space that are at the extremes of typical
calibrations.
The intuition for the occurence of indeterminacy of an expectational equilibrium can
be illustrated as follows. Suppose agents expect for some non-fundamental reason that
unemployment increases in the future, which would reduce hiring costs in the future.
This would motivate ...rms to hire less workers today, which would in fact lead to higher
unemployment. Usually such non-fundamental expectations could be ruled out, since
they would lead to ever increasing unemployment rates, which would lead the system
to collapse, and thus cannot be a rational expectation. However, there are parameter
constellations in the labor market model, in which non-fundamental expectations of ...rms
could lead to rather falling unemployment. This is the case when the hiring costs (which
depend on unemployment as well) only weakly react to such expectations. Then the
above mentioned cost saving motive is not present. Then arbitrary non-fundamental
2
expectational changes can have real e¤ects on today'
s behavior, but eventually correct
themselves, and the system would, along the relevant adjustment path, return to the
long-run equilibrium.
3
Nicht-technische Zusammenfassung
In makro-ökonomischen Modellen in denen individuelles Verhalten vorausschauend ist,
besteht die Möglichkeit, dass Mutmaß
ungen über zukünftige ökonomische Variablen zu
sich selbst erfüllenden aggregierten Fluktuationen führen. Man spricht in diesem Kon-
text auch von durch Sonnen
ecken hervorgerufenen Fluktuationen. Die Ursache für solch
eine Möglichkeit liegt in der Tatsache, dass, wenn ökonomische Akteure ihre Entschei-
dungen tre¤en, sie rationale Erwartungen bilden, indem sie ihr Verhalten und das der
Volkswirtschaft in die Zukunft fortschreiben. In einem "regulären" ökonomischen Sys-
tem führen nicht-optimale Entscheidungen zu instabilen Lösungen, die explodieren oder
implodieren, so dass nur ein eindeutiger stabiler Gleichgewichtspfad als rationale, deter-
minierte Lösung übrig bleibt. In einem "nicht-regulären"System gibt es viele Entschei-
dungen die heute von Akteuren getro¤en werden können, die optimal sind und dennoch
nicht zu explosiven Lösungen führen. In diesem Fall gibt es viele gleichgewichtige Anpas-
sungspfade, was für die Analyse von wirtschaftlichen Schwankungen problematisch ist. Ob
Nicht-Determiniertheit oder Determiniertheit des rationalen Erwartungsgleichgewichts
eines ökonomischen Modells vorliegt, hängt von der angenommen Struktur des Modells
und den Parameterwerten ab.
Das `
search und matching'
-Modell der Sucharbeitslosigkeit von Mortensen und Pis-
sarides (1994) ist ein bevorzugter Rahmen zur Analyse von Arbeitsmarktdynamik in
dynamischen, stochastischen, allgemeinen Gleichgewichtsmodellen (DSGE). In die-sem
Artikel zeigen wir einen potentiell problematischen Aspekt dieses Modells auf und zeigen,
dass eine Lösung des Models nicht-existent oder undeterminiert sein kann. Insbesondere
ergeben sich Probleme der Eindeutigkeit des Gleichgewichts, wenn die Rate mit der neue
Arbeitsverhältnisse zustande kommen, nicht stark genug auf sich ändernde Arbeitsmark-
tbedingungen reagiert. In solch einem Szenario kann es also auch in einem Arbeitsmarkt-
modell zu Fluktuationen auf Basis von sich selbst erfüllenden Erwartungen kommen. Auf
der anderen Seite kann auch dann kein Gleichgewicht vorliegen, wenn die Rate mit der
Arbeitsverhältnisse zustande kommen, zu stark auf Arbeitsmarktbedingungen reagiert.
Obgleich diese Determiniertheitsprobleme prinzipiell möglich sind, bewerten wir sie als
nicht wahrscheinlich, da hierzu Parameterwerte nötig sind, die aus Sicht von typischen
Kalibrierungen eher extrem sind.
Die Intuition für das Auftreten von Nichtdeterminiertheit eines Erwartungsgleichgewichts
kann wie folgt illustriert werden. Man nehme an, dass ohne fundamentalen Anlass ein
Anstieg von Arbeitslosigkeit für zukünftige Perioden erwartet wird, was in der Zukunft
Kosternersparnisse bei den Einstellungen ermöglichen sollte. Diese würden Firmen mo-
4
tivieren, heute weniger Arbeitskräfte einzustellen, was dann tatsächlich zu höherer Ar-
beitslosigkeit führt. Normalerweise können solche fundamental nicht gerechtfertigten Er-
wartungen ausgeschlossen werden, da sie zu immerwährend steigenden Arbeitslosenraten
führten, bis das System kollabiert, was keine rationale Erwartung sein kann. Es gibt allerd-
ings Parameterkonstellationen des Arbeitsmarktmodells, in denen nicht-fundamentale Er-
wartungen der Firmen heute tendenziell zu fallender Arbeitslosigkeit führen. Dies ist der
Fall, wenn Einstellungskosten relativ schwach auf diese Erwartungen reagieren, sodass das
obengenannte Kostenersparnismotiv entfällt. Dann würden beliebige nicht-fundamentale
Erwartungsänderungen zwar E¤ekte auf das Verhalten haben, sich aber am Ende selbst
korrigieren, und das System würde auf dem entsprechenden Pfad wieder zum langfristigen
Gleichgewicht zurück...nden.
5
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 A Canonical DSGE Model with Labor Market
Search and Matching 2
3 Steady State and Calibration 6
4 Indeterminacy and Non-Existence 7
5 Conclusion 12
List of Figures
1 Determinacy Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Instability and Indeterminacy in a Simple Search and Matching
Model1
1 Introduction
The search and matching model of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) has become a popu-
lar and successful framework for analyzing labor market dynamics in dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models.2 In this article, we point out a potentially problem-
atic feature of this framework. We show that the solution to the dynamic model can be
non-existent or indeterminate. In particular, uniqueness problems arise when endogenous
matching in response to labor market pressures is not elastic enough. In such a scenario,
extraneous uncertainty, `
sunspots'
, can lead to business cycle 
uctuations even in the
absence of any other disturbances. On the other hand, a solution does not exist when
matching is too elastic. While these determinacy problems are plausible outcomes, we
argue that they are not likely, as they are associated with regions of the parameter space
that are at the extremes of typical calibrations.
Indeterminacy in search and matching models has previously been addressed by Gi-
ammarioli (2003). Her article di¤ers from ours in that it introduces increasing returns
in the matching function, which is a well known mechanism to generate multiplicity in
DSGE models (see Farmer and Guo, 1994). We show that indeterminacy in the search
and matching model can arise even under constant returns. Our paper is closer to Burda
and Weder (2002) in this respect. Their indeterminacy results are driven, however, by the
existence of labor market distortions, such as taxes, and the associated ...scal policy func-
tions, and not by the features of the matching process per se. More recently, Hashimzade
and Ortigueira (2005) analyzed the determinacy properties of a real search and matching
model with capital. They show numerically how for a given parameterization the model
admits sunspot equilibria. Zanetti (2006) incorporates the standard search and matching
model into a New Keynesian DSGE model, where monetary policy is governed by an
interest rate feedback rule. He shows that this expands the region of the parameter space
where the Taylor principle, and thus equilibrium uniqueness, is violated. However, his
1We are grateful to Andreas Hornstein, Anne Davlin, Marianna Kudlyak, and Alex Wolman for
useful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not neces-
sarily be interpreted as those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem. Krause: Economic Research Centre, Wilhelm-Epstein-Str. 14, 60431 Frankfurt, Germany. Email:
michael.u.krause@bundesbank.de. Lubik: Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
P.O. Box 27622, Richmond, VA 23261. Email: thomas.lubik@rich.frb.org.
2A non-exhaustive list of references includes Merz (1995), Andolfatto (1996), Cooley and Quadrini
(1999), den Haan et al. (2000), Krause and Lubik (2007), and Trigari (2009).
1
paper focuses on the monetary policy rule as a source of indeterminacy. Labor market
search and matching only provides a transmission mechanism, but is not analyzed as an
independent factor of determinacy problems.
This article proceeds as follows. We present a canonical DSGE model with search and
matching frictions in the next section. This is a bare-bones version of the model that does
not rely on any increasing returns to scale in the functional forms. Our model speci...cation
has the advantage that the determinacy regions can be characterized largely analytically.
Section 2 discusses issues related to the calibration of this model, while section 3 derives
its determinacy properties, both analytically and numerically. The ...nal section brie
y
summarizes and concludes.
2 A Canonical DSGE Model with Labor Market
Search and Matching
We develop a simple version of a discrete-time DSGE model with search and matching
frictions in the labor market.3 Key to the search and matching model is that new employ-
ment relationships are the result of time-consuming search, both by ...rms and potential
workers. In order to hire workers, ...rms have to advertise open positions ...rst; they have to
post vacancies which is assumed to be costly. Existing matches between workers and ...rms
are subject to job destruction, which leads to a 
ow of workers into the unemployment
pool. The behavior of the aggregate economy is governed by the choices of a representa-
tive household, which desires to smooth consumption. The household engages in perfect
risk-sharing between its employed and unemployed members. The latter enjoy unemploy-
ment bene...ts while searching for a job. We employ some simplifying assumptions later
on which lead to steady-state and dynamic equations that can be solved analytically. The
properties of the full model are then analyzed numerically.
Time is discrete. One period in the model is assumed to be a quarter. There is a
continuum of identical ...rms that employ workers each of whom inelastically supplies one
unit of labor.4 Output y of a typical ...rm is linear in employment n:
yt
= nt
: (1)
The matching process is represented by a constant-returns matching function, m(ut
; vt
) =
mut
v1
t
, of unemployment u and vacancies v, with parameters m > 0 and 0 < < 1.
3The model is similar to Lubik (2009), to which we refer the reader for additional discussion and
references.
4For expositional convenience, we present the problem of a representative ...rm only, and abstract from
indexing the individual form and aggregation issues.
2
It captures the number of newly formed employment relationships that arise out of the
contacts of unemployed workers and ...rms seeking to ...ll open positions. Unemployment
is de...ned as:
ut
= 1 nt
; (2)
which is the measure of all potential workers in the economy who are not employed at the
beginning of the period and are thus available for job search activities.
In
ows to unemployment arise from exogenous job destruction at rate 0 < < 1.
Employment therefore evolves according to:
nt
= (1 )[nt 1
+ m(ut 1
; vt 1
)]: (3)
Note that newly matching workers that are separated from their job within the period
re-enter the matching pool immediately. We can de...ne q( t
) as the probability of ...lling
a vacancy, or the ...rm-matching rate, where t
= vt
=ut
. We refer to as the degree of
labor market tightness. In terms of the matching function, we can write this as q( t
) =
m(ut
; vt
)=vt
= m t
. Similarly, the probability of ...nding a job, the worker-matching
rate, is p( t
) = m(ut
; vt
)=ut
= m 1
t
. An individual ...rm is atomistic in the sense that
it takes the aggregate matching rate q( t
) as given. The employment constraint on the
...rm'
s decision problem is therefore:
nt
= (1 )[nt 1
+ vt 1
q( t 1
)]; (4)
that is, it is linear in vacancy postings.
Firms maximize pro...ts, using the discount factor t t
0
(to be determined below):
max
fvt;ntg1
t=0
1
X
t=0
t t
0
[nt
wt
nt
vt
] + (5)
+
1
X
t=0
t t
0
t
[(1 )[nt 1
+ vt 1
q( t 1
)] nt
] :
Wages paid to the workers are wt
, while > 0 is a ...rm'
s cost of opening a vacancy. is
the Lagrange-multiplier on the ...rm'
s employment constraint. It can be interpreted as the
marginal value of a ...lled position. Firms decide on how many vacancies to post (which
can be turned into employment relationships) and how many workers to hire. The ...rst
order conditions are:
nt
: t
= 1 wt
+ (1 ) t+1
t
t+1
; (6)
vt
: = (1 ) t+1
t
t+1
q( t
); (7)
3
which imply a job creation condition:
q( t
)
= (1 ) t+1
t
1 wt+1
+
q( t+1
)
: (8)
This optimality condition trades o¤the expected hiring cost (which depends on the success
probability q( t
)) against the bene...ts of a productive match (which consists of the output
accruing to the ...rms net of wage payments and the future savings on hiring costs when the
current match is successful. These costs are identical to the value of a job in equilibrium).
We assume that the economy is populated by a representative household. The house-
hold is composed of workers, who are either unemployed or employed. If they are unem-
ployed they are compelled to search for a job, but they can draw unemployment bene...ts
b. Employed members of the household receive pay w, but share this with the unem-
ployed. They do not su¤er disutility from working and supply a ...xed number of hours.5
The household'
s only choice variable is consumption, so that its optimization problem is
trivial:
max
fCtg1
t=0
1
X
t=0
t
C1
t
1
1
; (9)
subject to:
Ct
= Yt
; (10)
where C is consumption and Y is income earned from labor and residual pro...ts from
the ...rms; 0 < < 1 is the discount factor, and 1 is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution. From the household'
s (trivial) ...rst-order condition we ...nd that t
= Ct
,
where is the multiplier on the household'
s budget constraint. In equilibrium, total
income accruing to the household equals net output in the economy, which is composed
of production less real resources lost in the search process:
Yt
= yt
vt
: (11)
Finally, we need to derive how wages are determined. We assume that wages are set
according to the Nash bargaining solution.6 Firms and workers maximize the bargaining
function:
max
wt
(Wt
) (Jt
)1 : (12)
5We thus assume income pooling between employed and unemployed households, and abstract from
potential incentive problems concerning labor market search. This allows us to treat the labor market
separate from the consumption choice. See Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996) for discussion of these
issues.
6This is a standard assumption in the literature. Shimer (2005) provides further discussion.
4
with respect to the variable over which the two parties bargain, namely the wage wt
. This
results in the sharing rule:
Jt
= (1 ) Wt
: (13)
Wt
denotes the match surplus accruing to the worker, while Jt
is the ...rm'
s surplus, that
is, the value of a ...lled job. The latter can be found from the ...rm'
s optimization problem.
It is equal to the Lagrange-multiplier on the employment constraint t
, and is the shadow
value of a ...lled position; to wit, Jt
= t
. From the ...rst-order condition with respect to
employment we ...nd:
Jt
= 1 wt
+ (1 ) t+1
t
Jt+1
: (14)
The expression states that the value of a ...lled job is its marginal product, 1, net of wage
payments wt
; but it also has a continuation value Jt+1
, which is discounted at the time
preference rate , and assuming that the ...lled job is still there next period. The latter is
captured by the survival rate (1 ).
We can derive the worker'
s surplus as follows. The worker receives payment in form
of the wage wt
. But while he is working, he loses the value of being unemployed b. The
latter can be interpreted as the money value of enjoying leisure, engaging in household
production, or simply unemployment bene...ts. Therefore, the current period net return
is wt
b. In the next period, the worker receives the continuation value Wt+1
, which is
discounted at rate . The worker has to take into account that he might not be employed
next period, which is captured by the survival rate (1 ), adjusted for the fact that a
separated worker might not ...nd a job again with probability [1 p( t
)]. Putting it all
together, we have:
Wt
= wt
b + (1 ) [1 p( t
)] t+1
t
Wt+1
: (15)
The two marginal values can now be substituted into the sharing rule, and after some
algebra using the ...rm'
s ...rst-order conditions, we can ...nd the Nash-bargained wage:
wt
= (1 + t
) + (1 )b: (16)
We can now use this wage equation to derive the job creation condition:
q( t
)
= (1 )
Yt
Yt+1
(1 ) (1 b) t+1
+
q( t+1
)
; (17)
where we have used the ...rst-order conditions of the household to eliminate the Lagrange-
multiplier from the discount factor. The dynamics of the model are given by the
...ve equations in ...ve unknowns: (2), (3), (11), (17), and the de...nition of labor market
tightness t
.
5
3 Steady State and Calibration
We ...rst compute the deterministic steady state of the model. We then linearize the
dynamic system around the steady state and analyze the local determinacy properties of
the economy. The equations describing the steady state are:
u = 1 n; (18)
=
v
u
; (19)
n =
1
mv1 u ; (20)
Y = n v; (21)
(1 )(1 b) =
1 (1 )
(1 ) m
+ c : (22)
(20) is the employment accumulation equation. It stipulates that in
ows and out
ows
of the unemployment pool have to be equal. In a steady-state equilibrium, the number
of separated workers n has to equal newly hired workers. Eq. (22) is the job creation
condition, while the other equations are de...nitions.
There are ...ve endogenous variables (u, n, v, , y) and seven structural parameters ( ,
m, , , , , b). Because of the non-linearity in the last equation there is no analytical
solution to this system. Given values for the parameters, however, we can compute a
numerical solution. Using a non-linear equation solver we determine from Eq. (22).7
From Eq. (20) we can ...nd u = 1 + 1 m 1
1
, and the solution for the other variables
follows immediately.
We ...nd it more convenient, however, to calibrate the model by ...xing the steady
state unemployment rate u = u. This implies that one parameter has to be determined
endogenously. Additionally, we can ...x the endogenous matching rate q = m by using
evidence on the rates at which ...rms ...ll vacancies. Hence, another parameter has to be
determined endogenously. Using n = 1 u in (20) we ...nd that the match e¢ ciency
parameter is m =
1
1 u
u
q1 and labor market tightness is = m
q
1=
. From (22)
we can then also compute: 1 b =
1
+ 1
1
1 (1 )
(1 ) m
. Note, however, that this condition
does not pin down b and independently, nor does any other restriction in the model.
Eq. (21) helps only insofar it restricts such that y remains positive. We chose to ...x the
vacancy cost parameter and let the bene...t parameter b be determined endogenously.
7Since the function in is monotonically increasing for non-negative there is a unique solution to
this equation as long as 0 b < 1. This re
ects the fact that the outside option of the worker, namely
staying unemployed, cannot be larger than the worker'
s marginal product, i.e. the maximum rent that
the worker can extract from the ...rm.
6
For our calibration exercise we set the discount factor = 0:99. We choose a separation
rate of = 0:1. This is consistent with the evidence reported in Shimer (2005) and Lubik
(2010), who uses various econometric methods to estimate this parameter from U.S. labor
market data. We agnostically set the bargaining parameter = 0:5 and follow most of
the literature in this respect. Similarly, the match elasticity = 0:5, which is on the
low end of estimates in the literature. Note that this benchmark calibration implements
the Hosios-condition, under which the market allocation in the model is socially e¢ cient.
The value for the match elasticity is at the low end of the plausible range as reported
in the empirical study by Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001). We set the intertemporal
substitution elasticity = 1.
Finally, the two steady state values are chosen as follows. We ...x the unemployment
rate u at 12%. Our idea is to capture both measured unemployment in terms of recipients
of unemployment bene...ts and potential job searchers that are only marginally attached to
the labor force, but are open to job search. Since we do not model labor force participation
decisions, this is a shortcut to capturing e¤ective labor market search. This approach has
been taken by Cooley and Quadrini (1999) and Trigari (2009). In choosing the steady
state job matching rate we follow den Haan et al. (2000) who set q = 0:7. In the numerical
determinacy analysis below we conduct robustness checks for selected parameters and the
calibrated steady-state values by varying them over their admissible range.
4 Indeterminacy and Non-Existence
We now proceed by linearizing the dynamic equilibrium conditions around the steady
state. It is a well-known feature of linear rational expectations models that they can have
multiple equilibria, or that the solution may not even exist. We show that both scenarios
are possible outcomes in the standard search and matching model, but they are associated
with regions at the fringes of the parameter space. The linearized system is as follows
(where b
xt
= log xt
log x denotes the percentage deviation of the variable xt
from its
steady state x):
u b
ut
= n b
nt
; (23)
b
t
= b
vt
b
ut
; (24)
b
nt+1
= (1 )b
nt
+ (1 )b
vt
+ b
ut
; (25)
b
Yt
=
n
y
b
nt
v
y
b
vt
; (26)
b
t
b
Yt
=
m
X 1b
t+1
b
Yt+1
; (27)
7
where X = 1
(1 ) m
.
It is straightforward to substitute out b
ut
, b
vt
, and b
Yt
, so that we are left with:
b
t+1
b
nt+1
=
"
+ v
y
1
+ (1 ) 2
1
2
1 u
(1 ) u
u
#
b
t
b
nt
; (28)
where 1
= (1 )( m 1 ) + v
y
and 2
= n
y
(1 + ). This reduced form is
expressed in terms of the state (or predetermined) variable b
nt
and the jump variable b
t
,
which is a function of vacancy postings b
vt
. The stability properties of the solution depend
on the eigenvalues of the coe¢ cient matrix. A unique solution requires that one root be
inside the unit circle and the other root outside. Indeterminacy arises when both roots
are inside the unit circle, while non-existence occurs with both roots being explosive. In
the former case, both equations are dynamically stable and in...nitely many adjustment
paths (starting from arbitrary initial conditions) towards the unique steady state exist.
In the latter case, both equations are explosive, which implies that from any arbitrary
initial condition employment and vacancies would grow without bounds. This violates
transversality or boundary conditions and can therefore not be an equilibrium.
The coe¢ cient matrix is su¢ ciently complicated to prevent simple analytical deriva-
tions of the equilibrium regions. For illustrative purposes and for gaining intuition, we
therefore make the simplifying assumption that the representative household is risk-
neutral, = 0. Later on, we then discuss the general case using simulation results.
Under risk-neutrality, the coe¢ cient matrix reduces to:
(1 )( p)
0
(1 ) u
u
: (29)
Since the coe¢ cient matrix is triangular the eigenvalues can be read o¤ the principal
diagonal. Recall that the worker matching rate p = m 1 , which is equal to
1
1 u
u
. Since
we are treating the unemployment rate as a parameter to be calibrated, the determinacy
conditions therefore only depend on structural parameters.
We establish the determinacy properties in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 1. The model solution is indeterminate if and only if
(a) 0 < < 2u;
(b) 0 < < (1 )
1+ (1 )
p:
2. The model solution is non-existent if and only if
8
(a) > 2u > 0;
(b) (1 )
1+ (1 )
p < < 1:
3. The model solution is unique if and only if either
(a) 0 < < 2u;
(b) (1 )
1+ (1 )
p < < 1;
or
(c) > 2u > 0;
(d) 0 < < (1 )
1+ (1 )
p:
Proof. Indeterminacy requires both roots inside the unit circle. Call 2
= u
u
. It
is straightforward to verify that j 2
j < 1 over the permissible range i¤ 0 < < 2u.
Call the other root 1
=
(1 )( p)
. We have to distinguish two cases: if > p
no parameter combination can be found such that j 1
j < 1. If < p we can write
(1 )( p) > > (1 )( p). Simple algebra in combination with > 0
then yields 1(b). Non-existence requires that both roots be outside the unit circle. This is
just the opposite scenario discussed before. Part 2 of the proposition follows immediately.
Uniqueness requires one stable and one unstable eigenvalue. The parameter regions are
consequently implied by those not considered in Part 1 and 2.
The Proposition shows that indeterminacy is a potential outcome in this model. It
arises when the job destruction rate is less than twice the (calibrated) unemployment
rate. For instance, at a separation rate of 10%, the unemployment rate would have to
be less than 5% to de...nitely rule out indeterminacy on account of condition 1(a). This
value is not implausible, given historical data for the U.S. where the average post-war
unemployment rate is 4:8%. However, it has been argued (e.g. Trigari, 2009) that the
proper corresponding concept for model unemployment includes not only the registered
unemployed but all workers potentially available for employment, such as discouraged
workers or workers loosely attached to the labor force. Consequently, u should be assigned
a much higher value (for instance, 26% as in Trigari, 2009) which raises the possibility of
equilibrium indeterminacy.8
8Calibrating u to a di¤erent value implies that bene...ts b and match e¢ ciency m would have to
change, too, since they are computed endogenously from the steady state conditions. Higher steady state
unemployment corresponds to a higher value of b and lower m. This can be interpreted as an implication
of di¤erent labor market institutions.
9
Condition 1(b) imposes an upper bound on the match elasticity . In the benchmark
calibration, this upper bound is 0:147. Since is typically calibrated to be above 0:5
this would rule out indeterminacy. However, this observation comes with the caveat
that values for the match elasticity below 0:5 have some support in the literature. For
instance, Cooley and Quadrini (1999) argue that a low elasticity in the range of = 0:1 is
necessary to match labor market cyclicality. Using likelihood-based econometric methods
Lubik (2010) ...nds that there is, in fact, substantial probability mass on low values of .
We also note that the upper bound is increasing in the Nash-bargaining parameter. But
even if ! 1, indeterminacy would not occur for the typical parameter choices in the
literature. Suppose on the other hand that the unemployment rate were set to u = 0:06.
In this case, the upper bound increases to 0:816, which would imply indeterminacy for
typical match elasticity choices. Clearly, the interpretation of the pool of searchers in the
matching model matters for determinacy questions.
Intutitively, we can think about a sunspot equilibrium in the following way. Firms are
willing to incur vacancy posting costs if they expect to recoup them through the proceeds
from production net of wages and the savings on future hiring, as captured by the job
creation condition (17). The equilibrating mechanism is the behavior of the matching
rate q( ). An increase in vacancy posting, raises labor market tightness and lowers the
probability that an individual ...rm is succesful in ...nding an employee. This, in turn, raises
e¤ective hiring costs =q( ), which would have to be o¤set by higher expected returns. It
is this externality, namely the fact that ...rms do not internalize the e¤ect of their posting
decisions on aggregate match probabilities, that are at the heart of the determinacy issue.9
Now suppose that a ...rm believes that future pro...ts will be higher than is warranted
by the fundamentals, such as the level of productivity. Beliefs of this kind can be triggered
by sunspot shocks, as in the interpretation by Lubik and Schorfheide (2003). This belief
would compel it to post more vacancies. If other ...rms were to do the same aggregate
tightness would increase and match probability fall, raising e¤ective hiring cost. What
tends to rule out a sunspot equilibrium is that expected future bene...ts are not consistent
with the higher posting costs. Consequently, rational ...rms do not act on sunspot beliefs.
This argument breaks down in an environment where future bene...ts rise to accommodate
higher current costs. The Proposition stipulates that indeterminacy arises when both the
separation and the match elasticity are too small. When the former applies, the
9This has similar characteristics to the notion of an upward-sloping labor demand schedule in Farmer
and Guo (1994). In their model, production exhibits constant returns to scale at the individual ...rm
level, but increasing returns in the aggregate. An individual ...rm hiring more workers raises the marginal
product of workers in the aggregate, thereby stimulating more labor demand. The job creation condition
can be thought of as a vacancy-demand curve.
10
unemployment pool is small, while the latter makes new matches, and thereby future
employment, highly elastic to vacancy postings. Consequently, the savings on future
hiring costs react more than current e¤ective costs, which helps validate sunspot beliefs.
A similar argument applies for the case of non-existence of equilibrium. In general,
non-existence problems would arise for unemployment rates that are too low for given
separation rates, in combination with excessively high match elasticities. In more technical
terms, this combination makes the employment equation explosive. Any disturbance to a
steady state equilibrium would result in excessive job destruction (due to high separation
rates) and matching that is inconsistent with the job creation condition.
We now turn to the full model solution with risk-averse households ( > 0). We
compute the determinacy regions numerically for combinations of the match elasticity
and various other structural parameters. The results are presented in Figure 1, where
we have plotted determinacy regions for di¤erent subsets of the parameter space. The
parameters are calibrated at the benchmark values discussed above. In each panel we
vary two parameters over their admissible range while keeping the other parameters at
their benchmark values.
As a general conclusion, determinacy problems tend to arise when the match elasticity
is either too small or too big. For small the equilibrium is indeterminate when the
job destruction rate or the unemployment rate u are too small. This is related to the
analytical condition found in Proposition 1. Furthermore, ...rm-matching rates q above
0:2 and a Nash-parameter that puts more weight on workers also lead to multiplicity. No
equilibrium exists for large and either a small unemployment rate or above 0:2. We
also analyze the sensitivity of the regions with respect to (not reported). As ! 0
the indeterminacy regions expand. In particular, any q implies multiple equilibria when
< 0:2. In the limit the boundaries between regions are given in the Proposition. As the
household becomes more risk averse, however, regions of indeterminacy disappear entirely.
An interesting special case to consider is a calibration with the Hosios-condition, where
= . This can be represented by a 45-degree line in the lower-right panel of Figure 1. In
the absence of outside information on the value of the bargaining parameter , the Hosios-
calibration is often chosen in the literature. In this case, indeterminacy and non-existence
is ruled out, and becomes highly unlikely for other parameter combinations. For instance,
equilibrium non-existence requires a separation rate of = 0:81. Moreover, if = , we
can rule out indeterminacy in the case of = 0 because condition 1(b) of the proposition
never holds. The equilibrium could still be non-existent, but this would require very high
separation rates. In principle, these could obtain when the model period is much longer
11
than a quarter since eventually all workers turn over within a long enough time horizon.10
Interpreting these results in light of standard calibrations used in the literature, we
would argue that indeterminacy and non-existence do not present serious problems for the
search and matching framework. Hence, it is unlikely that sunspot equilibria would be
helpful in explaining labor market dynamics (as claimed in Hashimzade and Ortigueira,
2005). This is not to say that labor search and matching frameworks cannot support
indeterminate equilibria. Mildly increasing returns to scale in the matching function (Gi-
ammarioli, 2003) lead to widely expanded indeterminacy regions, while a New Keynesian
model with search and matching frictions in the labor market has broader indeterminacy
properties than the standard New Keynesian model (Zanetti, 2006).
5 Conclusion
We show in this article that for most plausible parameterizations the simple search and
matching model does not su¤er from determinacy problems. Speci...cally, we argue that
it is unlikely that the model has multiple equilibria so that extraneous uncertainty, i.e.,
animal spirits, can cause business cycles. Parameterizations that lead to indeterminacy
can be found, but they lie at the boundaries of the region that the empirical literature
would consider plausible. We identify the match elasticity and the separate rate as crucial
parameters in that respect.
These properties are obviously model speci...c, but our conclusions are likely robust to
modi...cations such as endogenous job destruction. While the boundaries of the determi-
nacy regions are likely to shift, the dynamic mechanism stays una¤ected. The main caveat
to our study is that our analysis applies to a local equilibrium in the neighborhood of the
steady state. However, the underlying model is non-linear and local results may therefore
not adequately describe the global equilibrium properties. Naturally, this is a topic for
further investigation. Moreover, researchers may actually be interested in the business
cycle implications of indeterminacy that does not depend on policy rules or externalities.
It appears plausible that actual labor market decisions are characterized to some extent
by animal spirits. Further research should shed some light on this issue.
10Incidentally, the continuous time version of this simple search and matching model always has a
unique solution (see Shimer, 2005), as the separation-relevant time horizon is in...nitesimal small. We are
grateful to Andreas Hornstein for pointing this out.
12
References
[1] Andolfatto, David (1996): "Business Cycles and Labor Market Search"
. American
Economic Review, 86(1), 112-132.
[2] Burda, Michael C. and Mark Weder (2002): " Complementarity of Labor Market
Institutions, Equilibrium Unemployment and the Propagation of Business Cycles"
.
German Economic Review, 3, 1-24.
[3] Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini (1999): "A Neoclassical Model of the
Phillips Curve Relation"
. Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 165-193.
[4] den Haan, Wouter, Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson (2000): "Job Destruction and
the Propagation of Shocks"
. American Economic Review, 90, 482-498.
[5] Farmer, Roger E. and Jian-Tang Guo (1994): "Real Business Cycles and Animal
Spirits"
. Journal of Economic Theory, 63(1), 42-72.
[6] Giammarioli, Nicola (2003): "Indeterminacy and Search Theory"
. European Central
Bank Working Paper #271.
[7] Hashimzade, Nigar, and Salvador Ortigueira (2005): "Endogenous Business Cycles
with Frictional Labor Markets"
. The Economic Journal, 115, C161-C175.
[8] Krause, Michael U., and Thomas A. Lubik (2007), "The (Ir)relevance of Real Wage
Rigidity in the New Keynesian Model with Search Frictions"
. Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 706-727.
[9] Lubik, Thomas A. (2009): "Estimating a Search and Matching Model of the Aggre-
gate Labor Market"
. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 95(2),
101-120.
[10] Lubik, Thomas A. (2010): "Identifying the Search and Matching Model of the Labor
Market"
. Manuscript.
[11] Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide (2003): "Computing Sunspot Equilibria in
Linear Rational Expectations Models"
. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
28(2), 273-285.
[12] Merz, Monika (1995): "Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle"
.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 269-300.
13
[13] Petrongolo, Barbara, and Christopher Pissarides (2001): "Looking Into the Black
Box: A Survey of the Matching Function"
. Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 390-
431.
[14] Shimer, Robert (2005): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
Vacancies"
. American Economic Review, 95, 25-49.
[15] Trigari, Antonella (2009): "Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and In
ation
Dynamics"
. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 41(1), 1-33.
[16] Zanetti, Francesco (2006): "Labor Market Frictions, Indeterminacy, and Interest
Rules"
. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 38(7), 1959-1970.
14
Figure 1: Determinacy Regions
15
16
The following Discussion Papers have been published since 2009:
Series 1: Economic Studies
01 2009 Spillover effects of minimum wages Christoph Moser
in a two-sector search model Nikolai Stähler
02 2009 Who is afraid of political risk? Multinational Iris Kesternich
firms and their choice of capital structure Monika Schnitzer
03 2009 Pooling versus model selection for Vladimir Kuzin
nowcasting with many predictors: Massimiliano Marcellino
an application to German GDP Christian Schumacher
04 2009 Fiscal sustainability and Balassone, Cunha, Langenus
policy implications for the euro area Manzke, Pavot, Prammer
Tommasino
05 2009 Testing for structural breaks Jörg Breitung
in dynamic factor models Sandra Eickmeier
06 2009 Price convergence in the EMU?
Evidence from micro data Christoph Fischer
07 2009 MIDAS versus mixed-frequency VAR: V. Kuzin, M. Marcellino
nowcasting GDP in the euro area C. Schumacher
08 2009 Time-dependent pricing and
New Keynesian Phillips curve Fang Yao
09 2009 Knowledge sourcing: Tobias Schmidt
legitimacy deficits for MNC subsidiaries? Wolfgang Sofka
10 2009 Factor forecasting using international
targeted predictors: the case of German GDP Christian Schumacher
17
11 2009 Forecasting national activity using lots of
international predictors: an application to Sandra Eickmeier
New Zealand Tim Ng
12 2009 Opting out of the great inflation: Andreas Beyer, Vitor Gaspar
German monetary policy after the Christina Gerberding
breakdown of Bretton Woods Otmar Issing
13 2009 Financial intermediation and the role Stefan Reitz
of price discrimination in a two-tier market MarkusA.Schmidt,MarkP.Taylor
14 2009 Changes in import pricing behaviour:
the case of Germany Kerstin Stahn
15 2009 Firm-specific productivity risk over the Ruediger Bachmann
business cycle: facts and aggregate implications Christian Bayer
16 2009 The effects of knowledge management Uwe Cantner
on innovative success ­ an empirical Kristin Joel
analysis of German firms Tobias Schmidt
17 2009 The cross-section of firms over the business Ruediger Bachmann
cycle: new facts and a DSGE exploration Christian Bayer
18 2009 Money and monetary policy transmission
in the euro area: evidence from FAVAR-
and VAR approaches Barno Blaes
19 2009 Does lowering dividend tax rates increase
dividends repatriated? Evidence of intra-firm Christian Bellak
cross-border dividend repatriation policies Markus Leibrecht
by German multinational enterprises Michael Wild
20 2009 Export-supporting FDI Sebastian Krautheim
18
21 2009 Transmission of nominal exchange rate
changes to export prices and trade flows Mathias Hoffmann
and implications for exchange rate policy Oliver Holtemöller
22 2009 Do we really know that flexible exchange rates
facilitate current account adjustment? Some
new empirical evidence for CEE countries Sabine Herrmann
23 2009 More or less aggressive? Robust monetary Rafael Gerke
policy in a New Keynesian model with Felix Hammermann
financial distress Vivien Lewis
24 2009 The debt brake: business cycle and welfare con- Eric Mayer
sequences of Germany's new fiscal policy rule Nikolai Stähler
25 2009 Price discovery on traded inflation expectations: Alexander Schulz
Does the financial crisis matter? Jelena Stapf
26 2009 Supply-side effects of strong energy price Thomas A. Knetsch
hikes in German industry and transportation Alexander Molzahn
27 2009 Coin migration within the euro area Franz Seitz, Dietrich Stoyan
Karl-Heinz Tödter
28 2009 Efficient estimation of forecast uncertainty
based on recent forecast errors Malte Knüppel
29 2009 Financial constraints and the margins of FDI C. M. Buch, I. Kesternich
A. Lipponer, M. Schnitzer
30 2009 Unemployment insurance and the business cycle: Stéphane Moyen
Prolong benefit entitlements in bad times? Nikolai Stähler
31 2009 A solution to the problem of too many
instruments in dynamic panel data GMM Jens Mehrhoff
19
32 2009 Are oil price forecasters finally right? Stefan Reitz
Regressive expectations toward more Jan C. Rülke
fundamental values of the oil price Georg Stadtmann
33 2009 Bank capital regulation, the lending
channel and business cycles Longmei Zhang
34 2009 Deciding to peg the exchange rate in
developing countries: the role of Philipp Harms
private-sector debt Mathias Hoffmann
35 2009 Analyse der Übertragung US-amerikanischer
Schocks auf Deutschland auf Basis eines
FAVAR Sandra Eickmeier
36 2009 Choosing and using payment instruments: Ulf von Kalckreuth
evidence from German microdata Tobias Schmidt, Helmut Stix
01 2010 Optimal monetary policy in a small open
economy with financial frictions Rossana Merola
02 2010 Price, wage and employment response Bertola, Dabusinskas
to shocks: evidence from the WDN survey Hoeberichts, Izquierdo, Kwapil
Montornès, Radowski
03 2010 Exports versus FDI revisited: C. M. Buch, I. Kesternich
Does finance matter? A. Lipponer, M. Schnitzer
04 2010 Heterogeneity in money holdings Ralph Setzer
across euro area countries: Paul van den Noord
the role of housing Guntram Wolff
05 2010 Loan supply in Germany U. Busch
during the financial crises M. Scharnagl, J. Scheithauer
20
06 2010 Empirical simultaneous confidence Òscar Jordà, Malte Knüppel
regions for path-forecasts Massimiliano Marcellino
07 2010 Monetary policy, housing booms Sandra Eickmeier
and financial (im)balances Boris Hofmann
08 2010 On the nonlinear influence of Stefan Reitz
Reserve Bank of Australia Jan C. Ruelke
interventions on exchange rates Mark P. Taylor
09 2010 Banking and sovereign risk S. Gerlach
in the euro area A. Schulz, G. B. Wolff
10 2010 Trend and cycle features in German
residential investment before and after
reunification Thomas A. Knetsch
11 2010 What can EMU countries' sovereign
bond spreads tell us about market
perceptions of default probabilities Niko Dötz
during the recent financial crisis? Christoph Fischer
12 2010 User costs of housing when households face Tobias Dümmler
a credit constraint ­ evidence for Germany Stephan Kienle
13 2010 Extraordinary measures in extraordinary times ­
public measures in support of the financial Stéphanie Marie Stolz
sector in the EU and the United States Michael Wedow
14 2010 The discontinuous integration of Western
Europe's heterogeneous market for
corporate control from 1995 to 2007 Rainer Frey
15 2010 Bubbles and incentives: Ulf von Kalckreuth
a post-mortem of the Neuer Markt in Germany Leonid Silbermann
21
16 2010 Rapid demographic change and the allocation
of public education resources: evidence from
East Germany Gerhard Kempkes
17 2010 The determinants of cross-border bank flows
to emerging markets ­ new empirical evidence Sabine Herrmann
on the spread of financial crisis Dubravko Mihaljek
18 2010 Government expenditures and unemployment: Eric Mayer, Stéphane Moyen
a DSGE perspective Nikolai Stähler
19 2010 NAIRU estimates for Germany: new evidence
on the inflation-unemployment trade-off Florian Kajuth
20 2010 Macroeconomic factors and Claudia M. Buch
micro-level bank risk Sandra Eickmeier, Esteban Prieto
21 2010 How useful is the carry-over effect
for short-term economic forecasting? Karl-Heinz Tödter
22 2010 Deep habits and the macroeconomic effects
of government debt Rym Aloui
23 2010 Price-level targeting C. Gerberding
when there is price-level drift R. Gerke, F. Hammermann
24 2010 The home bias in equities P. Harms
and distribution costs M. Hoffmann, C. Ortseifer
25 2010 Instability and indeterminacy in Michael Krause
a simple search and matching model Thomas Lubik
22
Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies
01 2009 Dominating estimators for the global Gabriel Frahm
minimum variance portfolio Christoph Memmel
02 2009 Stress testing German banks in a Klaus Düllmann
downturn in the automobile industry Martin Erdelmeier
03 2009 The effects of privatization and consolidation E. Fiorentino
on bank productivity: comparative evidence A. De Vincenzo, F. Heid
from Italy and Germany A. Karmann, M. Koetter
04 2009 Shocks at large banks and banking sector Sven Blank, Claudia M. Buch
distress: the Banking Granular Residual Katja Neugebauer
05 2009 Why do savings banks transform sight
deposits into illiquid assets less intensively Dorothee Holl
than the regulation allows? Andrea Schertler
06 2009 Does banks' size distort market prices? Manja Völz
Evidence for too-big-to-fail in the CDS market Michael Wedow
07 2009 Time dynamic and hierarchical dependence Sandra Gaisser
modelling of an aggregated portfolio of Christoph Memmel
trading books ­ a multivariate nonparametric Rafael Schmidt
approach Carsten Wehn
08 2009 Financial markets' appetite for risk ­ and
the challenge of assessing its evolution by
risk appetite indicators Birgit Uhlenbrock
09 2009 Income diversification in the Ramona Busch
German banking industry Thomas Kick
10 2009 The dark and the bright side of liquidity risks:
evidence from open-end real estate funds in Falko Fecht
Germany Michael Wedow
23
11 2009 Determinants for using visible reserves Bornemann, Homölle
in German banks ­ an empirical study Hubensack, Kick, Pfingsten
12 2009 Margins of international banking: Claudia M. Buch
Is there a productivity pecking order Cathérine Tahmee Koch
in banking, too? Michael Koetter
13 2009 Systematic risk of CDOs and Alfred Hamerle, Thilo Liebig
CDO arbitrage Hans-Jochen Schropp
14 2009 The dependency of the banks' assets and Christoph Memmel
liabilities: evidence from Germany Andrea Schertler
15 2009 What macroeconomic shocks affect the
German banking system? Analysis in an Sven Blank
integrated micro-macro model Jonas Dovern
01 2010 Deriving the term structure of banking Stefan Eichler
crisis risk with a compound option Alexander Karmann
approach: the case of Kazakhstan Dominik Maltritz
02 2010 Recovery determinants of distressed banks: Thomas Kick
Regulators, market discipline, Michael Koetter
or the environment? Tigran Poghosyan
03 2010 Purchase and redemption decisions of mutual Stephan Jank
fund investors and the role of fund families Michael Wedow
04 2010 What drives portfolio investments of
German banks in emerging capital markets? Christian Wildmann
05 2010 Bank liquidity creation and Berger, Bouwman
risk taking during distress Kick, Schaeck
24
06 2010 Performance and regulatory effects of
non-compliant loans in German synthetic
mortgage-backed securities transactions Gaby Trinkaus
07 2010 Banks' exposure to interest rate risk, their
earnings from term transformation, and
the dynamics of the term structure Christoph Memmel
08 2010 Completeness, interconnectedness and
distribution of interbank exposures ­
a parameterized analysis of the stability
of financial networks Angelika Sachs
09 2010 Do banks benefit from internationalization? C. M. Buch
Revisiting the market power-risk nexus C. Tahmee Koch, M. Koetter
10 2010 Do specialization benefits outweigh Rolf Böve
concentration risks in credit portfolios Klaus Düllmann
of German banks? Andreas Pfingsten
11 2010 Are there disadvantaged clienteles
in mutual funds? Stephan Jank
12 2010 Interbank tiering and money center banks Ben Craig, Goetz von Peter
25
Visiting researcher at the Deutsche Bundesbank
The Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt is looking for a visiting researcher. Among others
under certain conditions visiting researchers have access to a wide range of data in the
Bundesbank. They include micro data on firms and banks not available in the public.
Visitors should prepare a research project during their stay at the Bundesbank. Candidates
must hold a PhD and be engaged in the field of either macroeconomics and monetary
economics, financial markets or international economics. Proposed research projects
should be from these fields. The visiting term will be from 3 to 6 months. Salary is
commensurate with experience.
Applicants are requested to send a CV, copies of recent papers, letters of reference and a
proposal for a research project to:
Deutsche Bundesbank
Personalabteilung
Wilhelm-Epstein-Str. 14
60431 Frankfurt
GERMANY
