Open-end real estate funds in Germany ­
genesis and crisis
Christina E. Bannier
(University of Frankfurt)
Falko Fecht
(Deutsche Bundesbank and European Central Bank)
Marcel Tyrell
(University of Frankfurt)
Discussion Paper
Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies
No 04/2007
Discussion Papers represent the authors' personal opinions and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.
Editorial Board: Heinz Herrmann
Thilo Liebig
Karl-Heinz Tödter
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-1
Telex within Germany 41227, telex from abroad 414431
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978-3­86558­268­3 (Printversion)
ISBN 978-3­86558­269­0 (Internetversion)
Abstract:
Open-end real estate funds are of particular importance in the German bank-dominated
financial system. However, recently the German open-end fund industry came under
severe distress which triggered a broad discussion of required regulatory interventions.
This paper gives a detailed description of the institutional structure of these funds and of
the events that led to the crisis. Furthermore, it applies recent banking theory to open-
end real estate funds in order to understand why the open-end fund structure was so
prevalent in Germany. Based on these theoretical insights we evaluate the various policy
recommendations that have been raised.
Keywords: Open-End Funds, Liquidity Transformation, Liquidity Crisis, Risk Sharing
JEL Classification: G23, G28
Non technical summary
Open-end real estate funds perform a substantial liquidity transformation: While the
largest part of their portfolio is invested into long-term illiquid assets, they issue shares
that are redeemable on a daily basis at a prespecified rate which is only sluggishly adapted
to price changes of the underlying assets. This liquidity transformation exposes funds to
substantial liquidity risk and makes them susceptible to liquidity crisis.
In Germany a major part of the real estate funds are open-end. In December 2005 and
January 2006 a credibility crisis spread to the whole industry leading to a severe liquidity
outflow from those funds. This crisis episode stipulated a discussion about the necessity
of regulatory changes limiting the liquidity transformation further and improving the
transparency of those funds.
This paper gives a detailed description of the institutional structure of open-end real
estate funds in Germany and of the events that led to the crisis. Furthermore, the paper
applies recent banking theories analyzing the liquidity transformation and liquidity risks
of banks to open-end real estate funds and uses those insights to assess the various policy
recommendations that have been raised.
The paper argues that even though open-end real estate funds' liquidity transforma-
tion increases their vulnerability it might improve overall efficiency, because it increases
investors' liquidity insurance. Moreover, the liquidity transformation might serve as an
effective incentive device improving the performance of the funds' managers. Thus re-
straining substantially the liquidity transformation of those funds could be welfare re-
ducing. In contrast, the proposed discount on the redemption of large share holdings
is likely to be welfare enhancing. It not only increases funds' scope to provide liquidity
insurance, it also reduces the institutional investors' arbitrage opportunities that often
lead to unexpected large scale liquidity outflows. The suggested shortening of the eval-
uation periods for funds' real estate portfolios on the one hand improves funds' stability
because it also limits arbitrage opportunities. On the other hand, it certainly reduces the
scope of funds to intertemporally smooth asset price shocks. The recommended increase
in evaluation experts' independency as well as the fostering of solicited ratings improves
funds' transparency and thereby reduce the risk of herding driven runs. In addition,
greater transparency reduces the need for liquidity transformation as an indirect disci-
plining device for the funds' management. However, unsolicited rating might only serve
as a coordination device among investors and increase the risk of self-fulfilling liquidity
crisis.
Nicht technische Zusammenfassung
Offene Immobilienfonds betreiben eine weitreichende Liquidit¨
atstransformation: W¨
ahrend
der gr¨
oßte Teil ihres Portfolios in langfristige illiquide Verm¨
ogenswerte investiert ist, emit-
tieren sie Anteilsscheine, deren t¨
agliche R¨
ucknahme zu einem Preis garantiert ist, der
nur langsam an Marktpreis¨
anderungen der zugrunde liegenden Verm¨
ogenswerte angepasst
wird. Aufgrund dieser Liquidit¨
atstransformation sind offene Immobilienfonds Liquidit¨
ats-
risiken ausgesetzt und anf¨
allig f¨
ur Liquidit¨
atskrisen.
In Deutschland hat ein wesentlicher Teil der Immobilienfonds bislang eine offene Struk-
tur. Im Dezember 2005 und Januar 2006 breitete sich eine Glaubw¨
urdigkeitskrise in weiten
Teilen der Branche aus, die zu schwerwiegenden Liquidit¨
atsabfl¨
ussen f¨
uhrte. Diese Krise
l¨
oste eine Diskussion ¨
uber die Notwendigkeit weiterer regulatorischer Maßnahmen aus,
um die Liquidit¨
atstransformation der Fonds weiter zu begrenzen und ihre Transparenz zu
erh¨
ohen.
Das vorliegende Papier liefert eine detaillierte Darstellung der institutionellen Struktur
offener Immobilienfonds in Deutschland sowie eine Beschreibung der Krise Ende 2005 bis
Anfang 2006. Des Weiteren werden j¨
ungste Erkenntnisse zur Liquidit¨
atstransformation
und zu Liquidit¨
atsrisiken bei Banken auf offene Immobilienfonds angewandt. Hierauf
aufbauend wird versucht, die vorgeschlagenen regulatorischen Maßnahmen zu evaluieren.
So deutet das Papier darauf hin, dass auch wenn die Liquidit¨
atstransformation offener
Immobilienfonds ihre Krisenanf¨
alligkeit erh¨
oht, sie effizienzsteigernd sein kann, da sie
den Anlegern eine Liquidit¨
atsversicherung liefert. Dar¨
uber hinaus kann die Liquidit¨
ats-
transformation als ein Anreizmechanismus wirken und so zu einer besseren Leistung der
Fondmanager beitragen. Eine deutliche Begrenzung der Liquidit¨
atstransformation k¨
onnte
sich somit insgesamt wohlfahrtsmindernd auswirken. Dagegen d¨
urfte sich der vorgeschla-
gene Abschlag bei der R¨
ucknahme großvolumiger Anteilsbesitze eher wohlfahrtssteigernd
auswirken. Denn dieser d¨
urfte nicht nur den Fonds erm¨
oglichen, eine bessere Liquidit¨
ats-
versicherung f¨
ur ihre Anleger bereitzustellen, er sollte auch die Arbitragem¨
oglichkeiten
institutioneller Anleger eind¨
ammen, die oft zu umfangreichen unerwarteten Liquidit¨
ats-
abfl¨
ussen gef¨
uhrt haben. Die Verk¨
urzung der Bewertungszeitr¨
aume der Fondaktiva d¨
urfte
sich einerseits stabilit¨
atsf¨
ordernd auswirken, da sie ebenfalls destabilisierende Arbitrage-
m¨
oglichkeiten einschr¨
ankt. Andererseits reduziert sie aber auch die M¨
oglichkeit der Fonds,
Verm¨
ogenspreisschocks intertemporal zu gl¨
atten. Die empfohlenen Maßnahmen, die auf
eine h¨
ohere Unabh¨
angigkeit der Sachverst¨
andigen bei der Verm¨
ogenswertermittlung abzie-
len, d¨
urfte die Transparenz der Fonds ebenso verbessern wie die F¨
orderung selbstiniti-
ierter (solicited) Ratings. Dies d¨
urfte tendenziell die Risiken von durch Herdenverhalten
verursachten Krisen verringern. Dar¨
uber hinaus reduziert eine verbesserte Transparenz
auch die Notwendigkeit, die Liquidit¨
atstransformation und die hiermit einhergehenden
Liquidit¨
atsrisiken als indirekte Anreizmechanismen f¨
ur das Fondmanagement zu nutzen.
Nichtselbstinitiierte (unsolicited) Ratings, bei denen der Ratingagentur keine weitere In-
formation zukommt, dienen dagegen u.U. lediglich als Koordinationsm¨
oglichkeit zwischen
den Anlegern und erh¨
ohen so die Risiken sich selbst erf¨
ullender Liquidit¨
atskrisen.
4
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Open-end Real Estate Funds - An International Comparison 2
3 The Institutional Design of Open-End Real Estate Funds in Germany 4
4 Theoretical Arguments for Open-End Real Estate Funds 6
4.1 Liquidity Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4.2 Liquidity Transformation as Disciplining Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4.3 Liquidity Crises ­ The Unintended Consequences of Liquidity Transformation 10
5 The Trigger of the Open-End Property Funds Crisis in Germany 13
6 Systemic Repercussions of Individual Crises and the Role of Informa-
tion 15
7 The Spread of the Crisis in Germany 18
8 Policy Recommendations 21
Open-End Real Estate Funds in Germany ­
Genesis and Crisis
1 Introduction
Open-end real estate funds are indirect real estate investment vehicles that are of par-
ticular importance in Germany.1 Shares are directly backed by the properties and liquid
assets held by the fund. In contrast to a closed fund structure, an open-end investment
fund continuously creates new shares on demand. Investors can buy shares at net asset
value from the fund and may redeem them on a daily basis at the prevailing net asset
value, which can be higher or lower than the initial price at which the investors bought.
Consequently, even though shares are typically not traded on a secondary market, they
are a highly liquid investment.2 The price is quoted once a day based on the regular
valuations of the properties and liquid assets at that time. Since the regular valuations
are typically done only once a year on a rolling basis for each property, the redemption
value of a fund's shares adjusts slowly to changes in the market price of the underlying
properties.
In contrast to the experience in other countries, in Germany this fund construction
showed a remarkable degree of stability until recently. However, in December 2005 the
closure of Deutsche Bank's open-end real estate fund Grundbesitz Invest triggered a cred-
ibility crisis in this industry that put the stability of most of these funds at risk. In the
public debate on how to solve this crisis and prevent future ones, several proposals have
been raised. In this paper, we try to evaluate these recommendations.
In order to do so, we first analyze why the open-end structure of real estate funds was
particularly prevailing in Germany. Interestingly, applying recent banking theory to this
issue we find that there might have been good reasons for choosing an open-end struc-
ture that is fragile and susceptible to credibility crises. Based on the reasons that might
have led to the emergence of open-end funds in Germany in the first place, we analyze
We thank Philipp Hartmann, Jose-Luis Peydro-Alcalde, seminar participants at the ECB and the
CFS-workshop on the German Banking System Architecture for helpful comments. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Deutsche Bundesbank or the European
Central Bank.
1For example, see Maurer (2004) and Klug (2004) for a description of open-end real estate funds and
their importance in Germany.
2For some funds there also exists a small secondary market located at certain regional exchanges in
Germany. However, these markets are not very liquid and the trading of shares on these exchanges will
typically be suspended in crisis situations.
1
the measures proposed to increase their resilience. We find that some of the recom-
mended measures that are meant to improve liquidity control, valuation procedures and
transparency are actually counterproductive and may increase the funds' susceptibility to
crises even further.
Our analysis departs from a detailed examination of international experiences with
open-end real estate funds in section 2. Section 3 focuses on the institutional and regula-
tory design of open-end property funds in Germany and emphasizes the incentive structure
that arises between investors, fund managers and fund owners. Section 4 evaluates dif-
ferent theoretical arguments why this incentive structure might have been so successful
in the German bank-dominated financial system. However, we also point out its innate
drawbacks. In section 5 we try to link this dark side of open-end property funds to the
observed troubles in Germany at the end of 2005, particularly to the closure of Deutsche
Bank's fund Grundbesitz Invest. While sections 4 and 5 only take the view of an in-
dividual fund, section 6 discusses the disadvantages of the open-end structure from the
industry's perspective by taking different externalities into account. Corroborating the
relevance of these externalities, section 7 describes the onset of a widespread credibility
crisis of open-end property funds after the closure of DB real estates Grundbesitz Invest.
In particular, it discusses the chronology of events that led to the closure of another fund
in the course of the crisis. Based on these findings, section 8 tries to derive some policy
recommendations and evaluates the most important proposals raised in the aftermath of
the funds' demise.
2 Open-end Real Estate Funds - An International
Comparison
In the late 1980s, the Dutch fund RODAMCO was one of the largest real estate funds
in the world.3 It was owned by Robeco Group, at that time the largest independent
European investment group that managed funds. Robeco followed a policy of tacitly
guaranteeing fund prices. Thus, for 11 years prior to September 1990, Robeco bought
back shares of Rodamco at net asset value from any investor wishing to sell. Low interest
rates in the late 1980s made an investment in RODAMCOs shares particularly interesting,
since it offered a return of about 3 percent higher than a bank deposit. Due to the open
structure, a large flow of speculative capital into the fund resulted. At this time, the fund
had about three quarters of its assets invested in the US and UK real estate market.
In 1990, however, the rise of interest rates caused a high outflow of capital. At the
3See also Sebastian and Tyrell (2006) for a more detailed description.
2
same time, the US-market - and thus RODAMCOs portfolio - was affected by a severe
drop in real estate prices. This should have had an adverse impact on RODAMCO's share
price, because in an open-end structure the unit price is determined by dividing the total
asset value of property and cash by the number of units. Given the standard valuation
rule in place in the Netherlands at that time, however, stating that all fund properties are
only appraised simultaneously once at the end of the fiscal year, investors could predict
that the redemption price was going to suffer a severe decline at a future point in time,
i.e. the end of the year 1990. In that situation it was individually optimal for investors
to redeem their shares before and buy them back after the re-appraisal. Hence, arbitrage
had become possible, and that is what investors did on a large scale in September 1990.4
Robeco, however, reacted by suspending its traditional policy of buying back shares when
asked to do so by investors. Eventually, severe liquidity problems forced the management
to transform the fund into a stock-listed closed fund.5
A similar crisis occurred at about the same time in the Australian open-end real estate
funds market. In particular after the stock market crash of 1987, which caused a strong
increase in property prices, the Australian real estate market saw huge inflows of capital.
This surge was supported even further by the credit policy of Australian banks, which
lent out loans collateralized by real estate at exceptionally low interest rates. When the
central bank tightened monetary policy, property prices dropped by around 60%.6 This,
in turn, caused a run by investors in order to redeem their shares of open-end real estate
funds. To avoid a collapse of those investment vehicles, the government decided to stop all
redemptions for a period of 12 months and forced all funds to list on the stock exchange
(Little, 1992).
In Switzerland the first open-end real estate fund was founded as early as 1938.
Switzerland was also one of the first countries to introduce a regulation for open-end
property funds in 1967. Facing irregularities with redemption prices in 1991, the author-
ities adapted the regulations codified in the "Anlagefondsgesetz"(AFG). According to
these criteria, redemptions are only possible after a notice of termination within a twelve
months period before the end of the fiscal year (art. 42 AFG). This requirement should
ensure that the fund management has enough time to acquire sufficient liquidity if neces-
sary. On the other hand, the depository bank has to organize a continuous trade of shares,
in general by trading on the stock exchange. As a result of the new regulations, most of
4Of course, selling shares and buying them back after a short time period always involves transaction
costs. However, in the situation described above the expected price drop outweighed transaction costs,
making such a strategy profitable despite the involved costs.
5See Boot, Greenbaum, and Thakor (1993), Helmer (1997) and Lee (2000) for more details.
6See Allen and Gale (2000) for a theoretical explanation of asset price bubbles related to an inefficient
expansion of credit caused by risk shifting behavior of the banking sector.
3
the trading takes place at the stock exchange and Swiss open-end real estate funds do
neither emit nor redeem units in relevant amounts. Consequently, Swiss open-end funds
are comparable to stock-listed closed funds with a limited redemption possibility.7
Summarizing these international experiences, open-end real estate funds in all these
countries did not survive as a successful investment class because of their inherent fragility.
Crisis events in the real estate market forced legislators to transform these investment
vehicles into a closed-end structure in order to avoid a run phenomenon that could trigger
further uncertainties in the financial sector. In addition, the financial structure of the
respective countries obviously had a strong influence on the different characteristics of
open-end real estate funds.
3 The Institutional Design of Open-End Real Estate
Funds in Germany
German open-end real estate funds were the only exception internationally to have been
very successful for almost 50 years. One reason for this may be found in the specific
regulatory and institutional design of the German funds. Let us first explore the regulatory
design. In setting up the German Investment Companies Act in 1969 ("Investmentgesetz
(InvG)"), the regulation comprised a number of measures to limit the risk of liquidity
crises despite funds' obligation of daily redemption of shares. One of the most important
measures in this respect requires German real estate funds to hold at least 5% of their
assets in cash, with a maximum of 50% allowed. Until the crisis of 2005/2006, the funds
held 25-49% of their assets in cash or bonds. Furthermore, the funds are allowed to
maintain a leverage of up to 50% of their real estate assets' value. In addition, they can
delay the repurchase of units for a period up to two years in case of high liquidity outflows.
However, since 1959 this possibility of last resort has never been used until 2005.8
In addition, different elements of the investment practice and valuation process also
improved funds' resilience against liquidity crisis even if they were not initially imple-
mented for that reason. One such element is the offering charge of usually 5% which
becomes due on buying a share of an open-end real estate fund. Originally designated for
covering distribution costs, these built-in transaction costs create an effective barrier to
reduce the attractiveness of frequent transactions and thereby limit arbitrage opportuni-
ties. Furthermore, due to the offering charge, the necessary investment horizon to achieve
a positive return increases to at least one year on average.
7As emissions only take place occasionally, Hoesli (1993) refers to these funds as "semi closed-end".
8For a further description of the institutional framework of German open-end funds see Maurer and
Sebastian (2002), Maurer (2004) and Maurer, Reiner, and Rogalla (2005).
4
Another important aspect that represents a somewhat unique feature of the German
funds' design relates to the process of evaluating the funds' assets. While financial assets
are valued according to their market prices, the value of each property in the fund's
portfolio is based on an appraisal by experts. Under the Investment Companies Act,
the funds are required to have their property assets valued by an independent panel
of experts each time they acquire or sell a property. Additionally, the whole portfolio
has to be evaluated on a rolling basis every 12 months. Hence, the appraisal of the
funds' properties takes place at different dates during the fiscal year, which results in a
staggered valuation process. As a consequence, the effect of a change in asset values on
the redemption prices is smoothed and discrete jumps in the redemption rate creating
arbitrage opportunities for investors are limited. Further smoothing is accomplished via
the valuation methods. As has been emphasized by Maurer, Reiner, and Rogalla (2005),
property appraisals tend to lag movements in the property market and understate the
true volatility of returns in the underlying property values. This may be the result of
appraisal "anchoring" to previous evaluations, aggregation of information over time, and
the use of valuation methods based on yield analysis instead of cash flows - a procedure
which in general will be considered as hardly market-based.9
Of at least the same importance is the institutional framework in which the German
open-end real estate funds are embedded. By law, only an investment fund management
company ("Kapitalanlagegesellschaft") is allowed to manage open-end real estate funds.
The investment fund management company is typically set up in the legal form of a
limited liability company and usually manages several different mutual funds, not only
open-end property funds. From a legal perspective, the open-end fund itself is a special
asset pool funded by the investors' contribution on an open-end basis, which must be
strictly separated from the other funds and the investment company's own assets. Inter-
estingly, in Germany the shareholders of these investment fund management companies
are mostly commercial banks and insurance companies and are therefore not identical
with the investors holding the open-end property funds' shares.
By the end of 2005, 31 open-end funds were managed by 16 investment management
companies registered in Germany. These funds had more than EUR 85 billion assets
under management, which amounts to more than 15.5% of the total managed by German
mutual funds. This figure went up from EUR 47 billion in 2000, averaging a net cash
inflow in these 5 years of more than EUR 7 billion. Because most of the funds are owned by
commercial banks, it comes as no surprise that around 70% of all fund sales are brokered by
banks, which use their network of branches throughout Germany as distribution channel.
Along with the huge capital inflow of the last years, the investor structure has changed
9See also Morgan (1998) and McParland, Adair, and McGreal (2002) for a similar assessment.
5
substantially. Even though private investors, who were searching for less risky assets after
the stock market crash in 2001, invested heavily into open-end property funds, particularly
institutional investors turned to this type of fund in recent years as an alterative to money
market funds - despite the fact that open-end property funds were traditionally set up
mainly for private investors.10 Interestingly, institutional investors were not required to
pay the offering charge of 5%. Hence, they did not have to bear the built-in transaction
costs when moving in and out of these funds.
Examining the historical risk-return profile of open-end real estate funds in Germany
over the period 1980-2002, we find that, in comparison to equity and bonds, real estate
funds exhibited by far the lowest volatility. The average nominal respectively real return
on real estate funds was clearly below the average return on equity, but only slightly
lower than the return on bonds. On a yearly basis, between 1959 and 2004 open-end real
estate funds yielded an average return of about 4%, without a single year displaying a
negative performance (Klug, 2004). For that reason, in recent years some open-end real
estate funds actually advertised an implicit promise to investors of a yearly return of at
least 3%. Thus, in summary, open-end real estate funds in Germany exhibit risk-return
characteristics that are different from any other asset class and that make them attractive
both for institutional and private investors.11
4 Theoretical Arguments for Open-End Real Estate
Funds
4.1 Liquidity Insurance
In the aftermath of the severe stock market crash in 2001, investors developed a strong
awareness of the liquidity risk associated with long-term though marketable investments
like stocks and investment fund shares. Thus, one of the main sales argument for open-end
real estate funds, that contributed to their take-off immediately after the stock markets
crashed, was the guaranteed redemption of fund shares and the fact that the staggered
evaluation of underlying assets promised a very moderate volatility of the redemption
rates. The open-end structure of real estate funds hence offered investors a liquidity
insurance.
10In Germany, apart from public open-end real estate funds also special property funds exist, which are
designated for a limited number, i.e. up to 10, of institutional investors. These special funds are usually
managed by the same investment companies that offer also public open-end property funds.
11See also Maurer, Reiner, and Rogalla (2005), who provide an in-depth analysis of the risk-return
profile of German open-end real estate funds.
6
Similar to the argument that Diamond and Dybvig (1983) develop for bank deposits,
investors' demand for liquidity insurance might result from the fact that, by the time
of their investment decision, investors do not know exactly when they will actually need
their funds back. Risk-avers investors will therefore prefer an investment product that
provides them with comparably smooth repayments irrespective of whether they redeem
their funds early or late. By holding parts of the portfolio in liquid but less profitable
assets, open-end real estate funds can promise a rather high redemption in the short-run
at the expense of returns to long-term investors which remain below the average long-term
yield on pure property investments. Thus, ex-post those investors that happen to hold
their shares relatively long implicitly cross-subsidize the higher short-term repayment to
those investors that turn out to require their funds back earlier. Since funds' share holders
are assumed to be risk avers, this liquidity insurance is ex-ante appreciated by investors
and is welfare enhancing.
Following the argument of Qi (1994), originally developed for the case of bank deposits,
the costs of this liquidity insurance obviously decline if the fund can expect additional
liquidity inflow in the short-run from issuing new shares. The fund then needs to hold
fewer liquid and low-return assets as insurance against the expected early redemption of
impatient investors. Still, the costs of this liquidity insurance to long-term investors, i.e.
the implicit cross-subsidy paid by long-term investors, are apparently increasing in the
average fraction of investors redeeming their fund shares early. Put differently, the shorter
the average holding period of fund shares, the lower is the average return that these funds
can promise.
The increased engagement in property funds by institutional investors who used open-
end real estate funds as a substitute for money market funds to store liquidity, dramati-
cally reduced average investment horizons in these property funds. The higher short-run
yield that institutional investors realized in these open-end property funds as compared to
money market investments were essentially borne by small investors with generally longer
investment horizons. This undermined the efficiency of the liquidity insurance provided
by these funds.
The staggered adjustment of the redemption rates to changes in the market value
of the property held by the fund also enabled open-end real estate funds to offer an
intertemporal smoothing of asset price shocks to its long-term investors. Following the
mechanism described by Allen and Gale (1997) for the banking industry, the staggered
adjustment of the redemption rate allows open-end property funds to build up reserves in
times of increasing asset prices. These reserves can be used to stabilize the redemption rate
above the market value of the fund's underlying assets in periods of declining asset prices.
Thus, given risk averse investors, the funds' ability to intertemporarily smooth shocks
7
allows them to offer an additional efficiency enhancing insurance. However, this insurance
function of open-end funds is again undermined by institutional investors. Succumbing to
lower transaction costs typically, they can exploit intertemporal arbitrage opportunities
that the intertemporal smoothing of property price shocks by open-end real estate funds
generates.
4.2 Liquidity Transformation as Disciplining Device
Even though the liquidity insurance provision of open-end real estate funds might have
contributed to the emergence of these investment products, it is unlikely that this has
been the only factor. Particularly the observation that open-end property funds play a
truly dominant role only in Germany cannot be explained by this universal efficiency gain.
A probably more convincing argument for the long-lasting success of open-end real
estate funds in Germany can be made with regard to the disciplining role involved with
this financing instrument. This argument is based on the idea that redeemable claims
serve a control function, an idea that can be traced back to Fama and Jensen (1983). In
banking theory particularly Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001)
emphasize that refinancing illiquid assets with liquid liabilities­like deposits­held by mul-
tiple investors can serve as a disciplining device for the bank management. The fragile
structure due to the liquidity transformation allows the bank manager to credibly refrain
from moral hazard.12 This is due to the fact that each individual investor has an in-
centive to redeem his deposits as soon as he perceives any misbehavior of the manager.
If he withdraws his funds immediately, he receives the face value of his deposits. If he
waits, in contrast, the bank might not be able to repay due to the manager's misbehav-
ior. Moreover, knowing that many other depositors have the same incentive to withdraw,
each investor can anticipate that the bank will run out of liquidity. If the bank has to
liquidate long-term assets in order to satisfy depositors' demand, this will reduce the ex-
pected repayment of a depositor holding on to his claim even further. Thus, information
about a misbehavior of the management serves as a signal for depositors to run which
eventually forces the fund into default. Assuming that the manager is dismissed in the
event of such a crisis and assuming that his benefits from misbehavior in the short-run
are overcompensated by expected future benefits from being in office, he will try to avoid
a crisis and refrain form moral hazard.
12Similarly, Goodhart (1987) argues that the characteristic role of banks is that they­in order to
reduce informational frictions­use fixed-term liabilities to refinance fixed-term lending with a repayment
probability that is difficult to assess for outsiders. He also points out that this efficiency enhancing
combination at the same time makes banks vulnerable to crisis and creates the need for a lender of last
resort.
8
Similar to bank deposits in the argument of Diamond and Rajan (2001), an open-
end fund's redemption guarantee serves as an efficient and timely disciplining device. In
contrast to other control mechanisms, the liquidity transformation and the associated risk
of a run does not presuppose sophisticated investors, who have to monitor the management
of the fund - a time-consuming and difficult exercise because of the long-term horizon of
investments and the complexities in evaluating real estate assets. Fund managers who
anticipate the risk of a run will behave well accordingly, thereby giving investors no reason
to run, even though in principle they have an informational advantage with respect to the
fund's properties, which they otherwise could use to "hold up" investors.
Given these advantages of the open-end fund construction in terms of disciplining
managers, the question arises why open-end real estate funds survived successfully only
in Germany. One of the main reasons may be the particular severity of potential conflicts
of interest between fund management and fund investors in Germany. As mentioned in
Section 3, most funds in Germany are originated and owned by investment management
companies which themselves are owned by banks, especially universal banks. This is a
unique institutional feature of German funds. Since these universal banks do not only
own investment management companies managing a variety of different types of funds, but
usually hold further business relations with property development companies and property
dealers, they may have both the possibility to reshuffle assets at low transaction costs and
the incentive to do so. The only effective disciplining device of open-end property funds'
investors, consequently, is the option to withdraw funds on a short-term basis and hence
to "vote" by feet.
However, real returns on properties are uncertain. It is therefore important to also take
into account the possibility of return deteriorations that are not caused by misbehavior
on the part of the fund's management. As has been shown by Diamond and Rajan (2000)
for the capital structure of bank, in a world with uncertain returns on long-term assets
the choice of a pure deposit refinancing might be too rigid.13 Such a capital structure
precipitates runs when real asset values fall even without opportunistic behavior on the
part of the bank's management. Diamond and Rajan (2000) argue that it is therefore
optimal for banks to partially finance with a softer claim, i.e. equity. Such a soft claim
buffers the fund against exogenous shocks to asset values.
Because the open-end fund itself is a special asset pool funded solely by the investors'
contributions, a softer capital structure cannot be achieved. Yet, exogenous shocks to
the property returns can be smoothed by holding liquidity buffers. Such excess liquidity
holdings help to survive situations in which the cash flow from property returns falls
13See also Sebastian and Tyrell (2006), who analyze the advantages of open-end real estate funds'
liquidity risk based on Allen and Gale (1998) and come to similar conclusions.
9
short and the available liquidity is therefore insufficient to serve the usual and expected
redemption of shares.
In addition, an implicit promise given by the bank-owner to the fund's share holders
reduces the risk of runs due to asset deteriorations. Such a guarantee to provide liquidity
assistance in an emergency has to be implicit, so that it can be waived in case of misbe-
havior. Yet, it provides a buffer against smaller shocks to the asset value. Furthermore,
it has to be partial, because otherwise the disciplining function of runs and therefore the
advantage of the open-end construction would be lost. As a consequence, for larger asset
price shocks the risk of fundamental based crises due to asset price deteriorations is still
unavoidable.
4.3 Liquidity Crises ­ The Unintended Consequences of Liquid-
ity Transformation
As has already become apparent in the previous section, the liquidity transformation
of open-end funds makes them fragile and susceptible to severe crises. Particularly the
combination with the intertemporal smoothing of property price shocks due to the specific
valuation procedure makes these funds vulnerable in times of deteriorating returns from
property investments. If the cash flow from real estate investments declines, it becomes
more and more difficult for open-end property funds to refinance the usual redemption of
shares. Moreover, if property prices deteriorate, arbitrage opportunities arise due to the
staggered evaluation of the funds' properties. After a decline in real estate prices, investors
can therefore anticipate a reduction of the redemption rate. Particularly institutional
investors who typically face lower transaction costs have an incentive to withdraw their
funds shortly before the devaluation in order to reinvest them after the devaluation. The
arbitrage profits that they can realize from this strategy, however, absorb liquidity held
by the funds. If the liquidity shortage is severe enough, this may force the real estate fund
to sell off property below book value, leading to a further reduction of the redemption
rate. Consequently, even those investors who initially were not in need of liquidity or who
were unable to realize arbitrage profits, eventually have an inventive to withdraw, thereby
aggravating the liquidity crisis additionally.
However, apart from these "fundamentally-driven" crises, the liquidity transformation
of open-end funds also brings about the risk of self-fulfilling liquidity crisis, i.e. purely
expectation-driven collapses. Due to the liquidity transformation the mere anticipation
of a sufficiently severe redemption of shares by other investors may lead to the eventual
closure of the fund - even if the fund's fundamental value did not deteriorate at all. As
shown by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) for depository institutions, investors expecting
10
severe withdrawals of funds will also anticipate that the financial intermediary may be
forced to sell off long-term assets below book value in order to obtain additional liquidity.
Since these "fire sales" reduce future cash flows, investors must also anticipate that the
redemption rate will drop, which decreases the value of their claims. Thus, investors
expecting a large-scale withdrawal of fund shares have an incentive to redeem their units.
Consequently, anticipating a strong amount of withdrawal from other investors, each
individual investor will rationally withdraw his money as well, thereby vindicating the
initial belief on which his action was based.14
Technically speaking, the liquidity transformation function of open-end property funds
induces the possibility of multiple equilibria. Depending solely on investors' expectations,
there may prevail either an (inefficient) crisis equilibrium or an (efficient) equilibrium,
in which the financial intermediary remains stable. Interestingly, this case of multiple
equilibria - of which neither outcome can be predicted with certainty - necessarily requires
that investors are aware of the fund's fundamental value lying in an intermediate range
of values: the fund's fundamental value may not be so sound that the fund will never
be closed, irrespective of investors' behavior, nor so bad that the fund will certainly be
closed.
One of the main disadvantages of the theory on self-fulfilling crises is its inability to
predict which of the two equilibria will be realized. In order to fill this explanatory gap,
it has been argued that market participants may coordinate their actions according to
so-called sunspots, i.e. unrelated events that may lead investors to believe one of the two
outcomes to be more probable than the other. Recent analytical work on coordination
games has shown, however, that investors' behavior is not necessarily only influenced
by unpredictable sunspots. Rather, their behavior is crucially affected by the structure
of information about the fundamental value (in our case, about the fund's assets) that
they dispose of. Referring to the results of the literature on "global games"15, it has been
shown that investors' behavior is predictable, i.e. they choose a uniquely optimal strategy
even for intermediate fundamental values, if they possess very precise private information,
14Of course, this mechanism works in both directions, i.e. if an investor believes that other investors
are not going to redeem their shares, this reduces his incentive to do so, thereby vindicating his initial
belief because his behavior, in turn, reduces other investors' incentives to redeem their shares.
15In a global game, players observe a noisy private signal about the game's payoff, which itself is
determined by a random draw from a given class of games (Carlsson and Van Damme, 1993). In the case
of open-end property funds, investors do not know their investment's payoff with certainty. Rather, they
try to assess the payoff by taking into account any information that may be given to them. Additionally,
their behavior itself influences the payoff since the probability of the fund's closure increases in the number
of investors that withdraw their money. In this sense, the interaction between investors represents a
"coordination game".
11
relative to the precision of publicly-available information (Morris and Shin (2002); Metz
(2002)). In this respect, public information is defined as pieces of information that are
known to all investors and that are known to be known to all investors and so forth.
Hence, provided that investors' private information about the fund is sufficiently pre-
cise, the uncertainty stemming from self-fulfilling crises may be avoided. In this case,
investors will redeem their shares only if the fund's fundamental value is perceived to be
sufficiently bad. In any other case, investors will not be tempted to foreclose their invest-
ment only based on the anticipation that others will withdraw. In other words, there will
not be a run that - in a self-fulfilling prophecy - leads to a closure of the fund without
any fundamental cause. Furthermore, since the occurrence of a crisis can be predicted in
this case, measures may be taken to prevent it.16
What can we learn from the theory on global games with regard to the risk of liquidity
crises of open-end real estate funds? Due to the very specific nature of investment and the
mentioned evaluation complexities, it is certainly difficult for investors to obtain precise
private information about the fund's assets. This holds even more for private investors
who, compared with institutional investors, lack the financial resources to maintain an own
research department. Publicly obtainable information therefore remains very important
to bridge the informational gap between the fund's management and, particularly private,
investors. If this information is very precise, there is a high risk that an interval arises
in which self-fulfilling crises become possible, which may lead to the inefficient closure of
a fund, that would still have been viable had only more investors decided not to redeem
their shares. If public information is less precise, global games theory predicts a closure
of a fund only if the fund's asset values are sufficiently low.
Due to the important role that public information plays, we may state that both the
success and the demise of the market for open-end property funds seem to follow self-
stabilizing paths. As long as the fund's shares are seen as profitable investments, for
instance because of a successful development of the fund's share prices, this anticipation
leads to even more capital inflows into the funds, thereby corroborating its stability. If,
however, one fund is perceived to be distressed, this may be taken as a negative public
16Note that a crisis event may still be inefficient, i.e. it might have been prevented had only sufficiently
many investors decided not to redeem their shares. The difference to the purely expectations-driven
liquidity crises lies in the fact that not all investors choose the same action, i.e. either all redeem their
shares or no one does. Rather, the proportion of investors deciding on a withdrawal of money may lie
between 0 and 1, but may still be inefficiently high relative to the fundamental value of the fund. These
inefficiencies in run-equilibria have also been pointed out by Rochet and Vives (2004) and Goldstein and
Pauzner (2005) for the case of banking crises. However, a self-fulfilling liquidity crises will always be
inefficient, a crisis result stemming from a unique equilibrium in a global game does not necessarily have
to be inefficient.
12
signal about the general development of real estate assets, leading to severe outflows of
capital, thereby in a contagious process endangering also other open-end property funds.
The fact that observations of other funds' success or failure are public information to
investors and hence may strongly influence their behavior may both be strengthened or
alleviated by the services of public information providers, such as rating agencies. We
will return to this argument in section 6.
As already noted by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) an efficient measure to prevent self-
fulfilling liquidity crises is the suspension of convertibility of shares. However, this measure
automatically cuts the disciplining effect that the full-redemption of shares exerts on the
fund's management. As has already been mentioned above, it has to be weighed carefully
therefore, which of the two risks is more severe: the risk of management-misbehavior or
the probability of a run. In the latter case, we additionally have to distinguish between
a fundamentally-caused liquidity crisis leading to the efficient closure of the fund, or a
self-fulfilling crisis resulting in the closure of an otherwise viable fund. This distinction
will be taken up again in the next section that describes the closure of the first open-end
real estate fund in Germany, Deutsche Bank's Grundbesitz Invest.
5 The Trigger of the Open-End Property Funds Cri-
sis in Germany
Following the declining yields on commercial real estate in Germany many open-end
property funds came under pressure in 2004 and 2005. In several cases, the banks holding
the respective investment management companies stepped in to provide liquidity and
buffered a devaluation of the redemption rate. Prominent examples were Deka Bank,
HypoVereinsbank, and Commerzbank.
In contrast, on December 11, 2005, Deutsche Bank announced that due to prop-
erty price developments an unscheduled evaluation of its biggest ($7
.
2 billion) real estate
fund, Grundbesitz Invest, was unavoidable and would very likely lead to a devaluation
of the redemption price. The following severe withdrawal of funds absorbed most of the
fund's liquidity and forced Deutsche Bank to freeze redemption and close the fund until
further notice. At first sight, the troubles of Grundbesitz Invest looked like a typical
fundamentally-caused crisis, stemming from overvalued assets.
After the closure of the fund, the general problems of the German real estate funds
industry were analyzed extensively in public. Despite the general awareness that the
biggest flaw of open-end real estate funds lies in their promise of immediate liquidity to
investors while being tied-up in illiquid assets, the public wondered why Deutsche Bank
13
announced the freezing of its fund without any obvious cause. Due to the staggered valu-
ation process, a substantial part of the fund's assets had undergone a thorough evaluation
just recently. Without any exogenous event suggesting a severe shock to the value of the
fund's assets, liquidity transformation should not have been much of a problem. Even
more surprising was Deutsche Bank's announcement of not taking the usual steps of using
own resources to secure the fund - especially since there were signs that the commercial
real estate market was already improving at the time. Instead, Deutsche Bank simply
offered a fair compensation to a sub-group of investors (that had invested in the fund
within the last two years), not even to all investors.
This behavior stood in stark contrast, for instance, to the way Deka Bank, a large
investment branch of German savings banks, had handled the distress of its own open-
end property fund a year earlier. As was usual for the banking industry in Germany,
Deka bailed out its fund by buying sufficiently many of the distressed shares. Obviously,
Deutsche Bank had reasons for choosing to behave differently.
The difference in behavior between Deka Bank and Deutsche Bank may be ascribed
to the trade-off between maximization of reputational capital at the expense of financial
capital, and vice versa, that has been emphasized by Boot, Greenbaum and Thakor (1993).
Whereas Deka Bank obviously chose to preserve the reputational capital of its own open-
end property fund by bailing it out, Deutsche Bank decided on the opposite strategy.
As Deutsche Bank seemed not to have much interest in the development of its open-end
property funds market, it was not reasonable to value reputational capital in that segment
very much. Moreover, this difference in priorities may also be explained by the different
corporate governance of the two banks. While Deutsche Bank's diverse international
shareholders are efficiently enforcing profit maximization, the public ownership might
provide Deka Bank with a fairly long-term horizon for efficiency considerations.
Apart from the aspect of how Deutsche Bank behaved after the onset of the crisis as
compared to Deka Bank, there remains the question of whether the closure of Deutsche
Bank's Grundinvest fund was truly triggered by fundamental causes. It may be answered
with the help of the above mentioned theory of self-fulfilling crises versus a unique crisis
outcome in the global games theory. If the theory of multiple equilibria - and hence of
self-fulfilling crises - holds, the fund's demise took place within a rather uncertain market
where a sunspot-event decided on the realization of the closure of the fund. According to
global games theory, in contrast, the fund's freeze was the outcome of a unique equilibrium
and had to be expected with certainty once the value of the underlying assets became
known. Only in this respect could the crisis correctly be referred to as a fundamental-
driven event.
In order to distinguish between the two theories, it is intriguing to examine more
14
closely the information available to the market at the time the crisis happened. It might
have been the case that the announcement of a revaluation of the fund's assets proved
to be a sufficiently precise public signal to the market that the conditions for a self-
fulfilling crisis were satisfied, without the fund itself being of sufficiently low quality
to warrant a "fundamental crisis". If this explanation holds, investors withdrew their
money solely because they expected others to do so as well and not because they believed
the fund's fundamental value to be sufficiently low. Hence, they coordinated on the
inefficient action within a range of fundamental values where the efficient continuation of
the fund would still have been possible. According to global games theory, in contrast,
the observed closure of Grundbesitz Invest presents a fundamental crisis because investors
held sufficiently precise private information about the fund that convinced them of the
low value of the fund's assets. However, since finally after the reevaluation period the
redemption price of Grundbesitz Invest shares was only reduced by 2.4 % when the fund
was opened again on March 3rd, one may seriously doubt that the crisis was indeed driven
by private information about a fundamental weakness of the fund.
6 Systemic Repercussions of Individual Crises and
the Role of Information
From a regulatory perspective the welfare implications of an individual open-end real
estate fund being in a crisis ­ even if it is as large as Deutsche Bank's Grundbesitz Invest
­ are negligible. Of far greater importance are the negative repercussions that the closure
of such an individual fund has on the entire industry. In several ways the crisis of an
individual institute can affect the stability of others, potentially leading to a collapse of
the entire industry.
A "fundamental" way of how an individual crisis may cause contagious effects is
through its influence on real estate prices. In reaction to the liquidity shortage, the
troubled fund has to sell off large parts of its real estate portfolio. This absorbs liquidity
from the real estate market and depresses property prices. Similar to the channel of fi-
nancial contagion in the banking sector pointed out by Allen and Gale (2004) and Fecht
(2004), this may trigger liquidity crises of other funds, since at each point in time some
funds plan to raise liquidity in the market by selling parts of their real estate portfolio.
Given a severe drop in property prices, they will not be able to raise the expected amount
of liquidity from these transactions. This might cause a liquidity shortage at these ini-
tially solid funds and induce them to sell off additional assets, which creates a further
downward pressure on real estate prices.
15
A probably even more important self-enforcing mechanism leading to contagious effects
on other initially sound institutes may be induced by the effect of real estate market prices
on investors' arbitrage opportunities. As has already been noted in previous sections, due
to the staggered evaluation procedure the redemption price adapts slowly to declines
in property prices. Thus, investors observing a price decline can anticipate a reduction
in the redemption rate and realize arbitrage profits by withdrawing shortly before and
reinvesting shortly after the devaluation. As the arbitrage profits of investors absorb
funds' liquidity, it may even force previously stable funds to sell off property below book
value to gather additional liquidity. Anticipating this effect, even those investors who are
unable to benefit from the arbitrage opportunity have an incentive to withdraw on a large
scale. Indeed, these effects have been emphasized by many practitioners who also pointed
to the comparably illiquid and concentrated market for commercial real estate in Germany
which makes these spill-overs through asset prices a particularly relevant phenomenon.17
But given the difficulties of private investors in assessing the development of the fun-
damental value of real estate funds, "informational" spill-overs of an individual fund's
collapse might have even more severe repercussions on other funds: Due to the opac-
ity of real estate funds' assets, investors dispose of only imprecise assessments of future
returns and default probabilities of individual funds. However, given that the portfolio
structures of different real estate funds are in general very much alike, investors know
that it is rather unlikely that a shock affects only a single institution. Thus, the collapse
of one real estate fund serves as an indicator for investors holding shares of other real
estate funds. Consequently, observing that one fund is unable to redeem its shares, other
funds' shareholders trying to extract information from this observation will revise their
expectations about the soundness of their fund, which might increase their incentive to
withdraw. Because of the liquidity insurance that open-end real estate funds offer, unex-
pected large-scale withdrawals can trigger a self-fulfilling liquidity crisis. Even sound real
estate funds might collapse simply due to the erroneous change in investors' sentiment
following the crisis of an individual fund. Thus, ­ similar to the mechanism emphasized
by Chen (1999) with regard to banking crises ­ the collapse of an individual fund can
trigger informational contagion of large parts of a fundamentally sound industry.
In contrast to this endogenous source of information, exogenous providers of informa-
tion, such as rating agencies, can be expected to deliver accurate fundamental information
about individual funds' business perspectives to the public and hence perform a valuable
task in reducing the informational asymmetry between funds and investors. However,
17For instance, T. Vorwerk from S¨
udprojekt, an independent rating agency, and M. Rothe from Stan-
dard & Poor's raised these concerns during the crisis of Deutsche Bank Grundbesitz Invest (Handelsblatt,
January 19th, 2006).
16
whether or not they make the investment decision of shareholders more efficient remains
an open question. On the one hand, they may reduce the sensitivity of investors to the
fragility of other funds. Disposing of more precise information about each individual
fund, investors may rely to a lower extent on the information that they extract from
the observed collapse of one fund with regard to the stability of other real estate funds.
Consequently, by diminishing information asymmetries, rating agencies may substantially
reduce the risk of informational contagion between open-end real estate funds. Relying on
the results of global games theory, however, this finding only holds if the rating informa-
tion does not become common knowledge among all investors. In the context of real estate
funds, this may be a reasonable assumption, since the market for property fund ratings
is rather fragmented, and, unlike the market for credit ratings, is not divided among the
"Big Three" agencies (Moody's, Standard & Poor's and Fitch). Moreover, as fund-ratings
are not publicly announced but usually sold to subscribers, a public dissemination of their
content, for instance in the newspapers, will solely follow an extreme rating assessment
that naturally leads to a response in the financial press.
If, however, the rating information does become common knowledge, the rating's effect
may be similar to the impact that credit rating agencies have been found to have on firms
issuing debt. Focussing solely on the coordinating role of ratings due to their high degree
of publicity (in credit markets), Boot, Milbourn, and Schmeits (2006) have shown that the
existence of a rating agency may lead to a reduction of uncertainty in investment behavior,
as it becomes easier for investors to anticipate the aggregate market outcome. In their
model, the existence of a rating agency therefore contributes to the prevalence of a unique
equilibrium. However, as Carlson and Hale (2005) show, ratings do not only coordinate
behavior but also bring new informational content to the market. They conclude that by
simultaneously fulfilling both a coordination and an information function, rating agencies
may increase market uncertainty as multiple equilibria become more likely. Both papers,
however, lack a proper utility function for the rating agencies and simply assume that they
always try to generate a rating that reproduces the unknown credit quality as precisely
as possible, thereby maximizing the agencies' reputation.
In a recent paper, Bannier and Tyrell (2005) show that these earlier results do not
necessarily hold if a more complex utility function for a rating agency is introduced. In
particular, they assume that a rating agency not only tries to maximize her reputation
but also has to take into account competitive pressures from other information providers
and has to account for a potential feedback effect of her rating on the credit quality of the
rated firm. These arguments seem to hold for the ratings of property funds as well. In the
real estate market, competition between rating agencies is particularly fierce as market
entry is not as strictly regulated as in the market for credit-ratings. Due to strong com-
17
plementarities in investors' behavior following from the liquidity transformation function
that open-end property funds offer, potential feedback effects from a fund's rating on its
liquidity situation and hence on its future business prospects are particularly obvious.
As has been shown by Bannier and Tyrell (2005), rating agencies that generate ratings
taking into account the above-mentioned utility arguments may potentially but do not
necessarily increase market uncertainties. While a rating announcement automatically
increases the precision of public information on the market and hence raises the risk of
self-fulfilling crises, these may be prevented if investors have access to sufficiently precise
private information. However, as has already been mentioned, for the case of open-end
property funds this possibility is limited at least for private investors who were the main
target group for these funds. In this market, therefore, the existence of ratings, provided
that they become common information to all investors, may reasonably increase market
uncertainty and trigger inefficient fund closures. The more precise the rating is, the easier
it becomes for investors to coordinate their actions, which increases the effect. This result
is strengthened by an interesting feature of fund ratings. While usually ratings simply
assess the quality of the fund's underlying assets on a relative scale, there are ratings that
additionally combine this quality assessment with a sell, hold or buy recommendation.
The latter combined type of ratings will certainly ease investors' coordination based on
the published rating, as such increasing the risk of self-fulfilling crises.
An additional result by Bannier and Tyrell (2005) refers to the impact that the market
segregation between private and institutional investors has on a rating's influence. Usually,
institutional investors are required to invest only in assets or funds that are perceived to be
sound, i.e. in "investment grade" assets or "m¨
undelsichere Anlagen". These investment
constraints for institutional investors can be shown to increase the probability of a crisis,
i.e. of an inefficient mass withdrawal of money, where the effect is strengthened by the
relative size of their investment.
7 The Spread of the Crisis in Germany
Indeed the closure of Deutsche Bank's Grundbesitz Invest caused a widespread crisis in
the market for open-end property funds in Germany, supporting the considerations of the
previous section. Particularly interesting was the evolvement of rating agencies in this
respect.
The closure of Deutsche Bank's Grundsbesitz Invest apparently raised doubts about
the stability of German open-end real estate funds in general and the question of whether
German banks will generally continue their practice of providing liquidity assistance to
distressed property funds. The widespread credibility crisis of the open-end property
18
Figure 1: Monthly net liquidity inflow to public open-end real estate funds in Germany
(in Mio Euro)
-5.000
-4.000
-3.000
-2.000
-1.000
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
Jan 95
Jul 95
Jan 96
Jul 96
Jan 97
Jul 97
Jan 98
Jul 98
Jan 99
Jul 99
Jan 00
Jul 00
Jan 01
Jul 01
Jan 02
Jul 02
Jan 03
Jul 03
Jan 04
Jul 04
Jan 05
Jul 05
Jan 06
Jul 06
Source: BVI
fund industry is best illustrated by figure 1 presenting the monthly net liquidity inflows
at German-based public open-end real estate funds from January 1995 to December 2005.
Obviously, in December 2005 and January 2006 the funds faced a liquidity drain on a
previously unprecedented scale. The liquidity outflow in the month of December 2005
to February 2006 amounted to Euro 8.5 bil­more than 10% of the total assets under
management of these open-end property funds.
However, the timely announcements of several banks to provide liquidity to their open-
end property funds in the event of a shortage restored credibility and prevented a large
scale closure of other funds.
This was different in the case of KanAm, an investment management company that
manages two German based open-end property fund and is not owned by a bank. On
January 9, 2006, Alexandra Merz, managing director of Scope Analysis, a Berlin rating
agency, stated in Business Week that after the closure of the Deutsche Bank fund, the
closure of a second fund might trigger a run on open-end property funds. Despite the
perceived risk of any additional negative information about the real-estate fund industry,
Scope issued rating downgrades on two open-end property funds by KanAm on January
16, 2006. Both rating announcements were combined with a sell-recommendation. Inter-
estingly, the rating downgrades were not triggered by the announcement of a revaluation
of assets by the funds' management. Rather, Scope argued that a downgrade had become
necessary due to rumours about The Mills Corporation, one of KanAm's partners in the
US real estate market. Despite the fact that even a full default of The Mills would only
19
have minor effects on KanAm's assets, Scope argued that negative reports about The Mills
might trigger liquidity outflows from KanAm's funds that warrant a downgrade even of
KanAm Grundinvest, a fund that is not invested in US real estate, due to infection effects
between the funds.
KanAm responded to the rating downgrades by pointing out that Scope had not
obtained any data on the fund's assets from the fund's management, while a rating by
Feri, a rating agency based in Bad Homburg, only slightly earlier had announced an
excellent rating (AA) based on thorough private information about the fund. While the
lack of proprietary information usually leads a rating agency to dispense with a rating,
Scope decided to come forward with an assessment nonetheless. As Alexandra Merz later
argued, Scope was in a dilemma: either not to announce its knowledge about the negative
information about The Mills, risking not to be seen as a reliable source of information
if the public learned about the presumably deteriorating quality of KanAm's partner, or
to announce a negative assessment about KanAm's funds, thereby risking to act as a
"multiplier", leading to a self-fulfilling prophecy. The latter is exactly what happened.
Due to severe liquidity outflows, KanAm announced the freezing of its US fund on January
17, 2006. Two days later, KanAm also had to close the much bigger KanAm Grundinvest
fund.
Combining the demise of the KanAm funds with the closure of Deutsche Bank's
Grundbesitz Invest, we find that the former was definitively not triggered by funda-
mental reasons. In particular, KanAm US-Grundinvest was the most successful open-end
property fund in Germany at the time. It stands to reason therefore, which role the publi-
cation of the negative rating assessments played for the observed development of KanAm's
funds. The fact that the Scope ratings were combined with a sell recommendation - a
rather unusual proceeding - certainly contributed to the high perceived precision of this
piece of public information.
This perception of a high precision of public information about the KanAm funds'
quality might exactly have been what triggered the crisis. As the KanAm funds did not
seem to be in a range where a crisis was inevitable, an interval might have opened up
where self-fulfilling crises became possible. Since it is hardly possible to obtain any pre-
cise private information about the investments of real-estate funds, the perceived increase
in public information precision due to the rating announcement might reasonably have
triggered the possibility of multiple equilibria. Within the interval where self-fulfilling
prophecies decide on the market outcome, Scope's negative information coordinated in-
vestors on the inefficient decision to withdraw their money, which forced the closure of the
fund. Obviously, therefore, investors overreacted to the negative rating that was publicly
available rather than searched for additional sources of private information. This overre-
20
action reflects the dual role that public information seems to play on financial markets
due to strategic complementarities in investors' decisions. On the one hand, it conveys
informational content, on the other hand, however, it also coordinates investors' behavior.
As long as public information is sufficiently accurate, the latter effect might not distort
the market outcome away from the efficient action that investors would have chosen had
they perfectly known the true fundamental value underlying the fund. However, if public
information is incorrect, it may coordinate behavior towards an inefficient market out-
come. In the case of Scope's rating, information was certainly not very accurate as it was
only based on rumours and publicly available pieces of information and not on a thor-
ough analysis of the funds' data, even though it might have been perceived to be quite
precise as it was combined with a straightforward trade recommendation. The results
were aggravated by the fact that in particular institutional investors seem to have been
heavily invested in KanAm's funds and massively withdrew their money after the rating
announcement. Certainly this contributed to further withdrawals also by private investors
that finally led to the closure of the funds.
8 Policy Recommendations
After the troubles of open-end property funds in Germany in December 2005 and Jan-
uary 2006, different measures were recommended to improve the situation of these funds.
Policy recommendations mainly concentrated on three different aspects: liquidity con-
trol, valuation and transparency of funds.18 Our analysis of the different functions and
the operational risk of open-end real estate funds allows us to evaluate most of these
recommendations in detail.
With regard to the control of liquidity, funds have been recommended to increase the
level of their liquidity reserves, to introduce a period of notice for large sales (above one
Mill. EUR) of the fund's shares combined with a discount on the redemption of shares
from institutional investors, to allow for transactions between various funds owned by one
company and to support the public trading of shares on a public exchange once a fund
is closed. According to the logic that we followed in section 4.2 of this paper, an increase
in liquidity requirements for real estate funds should be seen as counterproductive. It
not only reduces the returns that these funds can generate, but it also undermines the
disciplining effect of liquidity risk on the fund's management. However, larger liquidity
buffers may alleviate the risk of a run on the fund: Higher liquidity reserves will reduce
the trigger of the fund's perceived value up to which investors will decide to sell their
18On January 24, 2006, BVI published a whole package of measures believed to be necessary to improve
the funds' operations.
21
shares.
A discount on the redemption of large shares, i.e. from institutional investors, should
be efficiency enhancing because the liquidity transformation provided to investors can
be improved (Diamond (1997)). Additionally, this measure strengthens the incentive
of institutional market participants to invest in monitoring of the fund, because they
cannot rely on withdrawing before small investors do. Most importantly, the discount
also limits the scope for arbitrage opportunities for institutional investors in anticipation
of a devaluation of the redemption rate.
Finally, the closure of a fund may only be efficiency enhancing if management is
dismissed. Otherwise, the suspension of convertibility of shares into money or the creation
of a mutual insurance system eliminate the disciplining effect of liquidity transformation.
These measures might be counterproductive if they reduce financial fragility, which is
necessary for giving the right behavioral incentives in a complex institutional financial
environment like Germany, by too much. While a trade of shares on public exchanges in
the case of a closure of the fund should solve this problem, it has been found that the
few burses that allowed for trading of open-end property funds stopped trading once the
funds themselves were closed.
Regarding the frequency of evaluation the proposals recommend a shortening of the
period in which each unit has to be assessed to 6 month. With regard to the question of
how to evaluate the funds' assets, policy recommendations ask for a stronger emphasis of
a market-based evaluation. Up to now, due to the staggered valuation process, individual
assets are evaluated not very frequently. Most of a fund's assets hence enter the evaluation
process with an outdated price that is closer to historical costs than to the present market
values. Interestingly, recent research by Freixas and Tsomocos (2004) and Plantin, Sapra,
and Shin (2005) comes to the conclusion that under certain conditions, "book values"
might be much better suited to evaluate assets than "fair values". Even though the papers
depart from different assumptions about the underlying market structure, both reflect
the working of open-end property funds reasonably well. While Freixas and Tsomocos
(2004) argue that book value accounting is preferable if the evaluated entity is supposed
to smooth intertemporal consumption, Plantin, Sapra, and Shin (2005) find that this is
true if the secondary market for the asset is relatively illiquid and claims are long-lived.
Obviously, it will be important to reduce the volatility of the fund's value by not allowing
for additional variability brought about by frequent changes due to a marking-to-market
evaluation program. However, while a shortening of the evaluation period and a stronger
orientation on current market prices limits the scope of open-end property funds to provide
intertemporal smoothing it also limits at the same time arbitrage opportunities that arise
due to temporary deviations of the redemption price from the fundamental value of the
22
funds' assets.
Yet, shorter evaluation periods and a higher emphasis on market prices also increases
the transparency of a fund's fundamental value. Similarly, the proposed increase in the
independence of evaluation experts by forcing funds to change the appointed expert every
two years should improve transparency. Better information about the fundamental value
of each individual real estate fund reduces the risk of informational contagion since in-
vestors to a lesser extent rely on information that they extract from another fund's failure.
In addition, greater transparency should also enable investors to exert direct control on
the funds management. This would reduce the need for a fragile capital structure that
enables investors to vote by feet in case of a bad fund performance.
An additional way to improve transparency is to foster the rating of open-end real
estate fund. Particularly solicited ratings might be an efficient way to reduce the risk of
informational contagion and improve investors' control of fund managers. But whenever
a rating agency does not have access to private information about the fund, as has been
the case for Scope's KanAm rating, the rating will only display a coordination function,
which raises the risk of a liquidity crisis for the fund. Thus, in contrast to solicited ratings,
unsolicited ratings might actually increase the fragility of open-end property funds.
23
References
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 1997, "Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal
Smoothing," Journal of Political Economy, 105, 523­546.
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 1998, "Optimal Financial Crises," Journal of Finance, 53, 1245­
1284.
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 2000, "Bubbles and Crises," Economic Journal, 110, 236­255.
Allen, F., and D. Gale, 2004, "Financial Fragility, Liquidity and Asset Prices," Journal
of the European Economic Association, 2, 1015­1048.
Bannier, C., and M. Tyrell, 2005, "Modelling the Role of Credit Rating Agencies - Do
They Spark Off a Virtuous Circle?," Finance and Accounting Working Paper No.,
Goethe-University Frankfurt.
Boot, A., T. Milbourn, and A. Schmeits, 2006, "Credit Ratings as Coordination Mecha-
nisms," Review of Financial Studies, 19, 81­118.
Boot, W., S. Greenbaum, and A. Thakor, 1993, "Reputation and Discretion in Financial
Contracting," American Economic Review, 83, 1165­1183.
Calomiris, C. W., and C. M. Kahn, 1991, "The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangments," American Economic Review, 81, 497­513.
Carlson, M., and G. Hale, 2005, "Courage to Capital? A Model of the Effects of Rating
Agencies on Sovereign Debt Roll-Over," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No 1506.
Carlsson, H., and E. van Damme, 1993, "Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,"
Econometrica, 61, 989­1018.
Chen, Y., 1999, "Banking Panics: The Role of the First-Come, First-Served Rule and
Informational Externalities," Journal of Political Economy, 107, pp. 946­968.
Diamond, D., 1997, "Liquidity, Banks, and Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 105,
928­956.
Diamond, D., and R. Rajan, 2000, "A Theory of Bank Capital," Journal of Finance, 55,
2431­2465.
Diamond, D., and R. Rajan, 2001, "Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial
Fragility: A Theory of Banking," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 287­327.
24
Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig, 1983, "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,"
Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401419.
Fama, E., and M. Jensen, 1983, "Agency Problems and Residual Claims," Journal of Law
and Economics, 26, 327­349.
Fecht, F., 2004, "On the Stability of Different Financial Systems," Journal of the European
Economic Association, 2, 969­1024.
Freixas, X., and D. Tsomocos, 2004, "Book vs. Fair Value Banking, and Intertemporal
Smoothing," Mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Goldstein, I., and A. Pauzner, 2005, "Demand-Deposit Contracts and the Probability of
Bank Runs," Journal of Finance, 60, 1293­1328.
Goodhart, C. A. E., 1987, "Why Do Banks Need a Central Bank?," Oxford Economic
Papers, 39, 75­89.
Helmer, S., 1997, Die Vermgensverwaltende Immobilien-KG mit Genußschein, Eu-
rop¨
aischer Verlag der Wissenschaften, Frankfurt/Main.
Hoesli, M., 1993, Investissement Immobilier et Diversification de Portefeuille, economica.
Klug, W., 2004, Offene Immobilienfonds, Fritz Knapp Verlag.
Lee, S. L., 2000, "Property Funds and Flow," Working Paper in Land Management and
Development 02/00.
Little, A., 1992, "Changes for the Unlisted Property Trusts," The Valuer and Land
Economist, pp. 166­170, 230.
Maurer, R., 2004, The German Financial System . chap. Institutional Investors in Ger-
many: Insurance Companies and Investment Funds, pp. 106­138, Oxford University,
Oxford.
Maurer, R., F. Reiner, and R. Rogalla, 2005, "Return and risk of German open-end real
estate funds," Journal of Property Research, 21, 209­233.
Maurer, R., and S. Sebastian, 2002, "Inflation Risk Analysis of European Real Estate
Securities," Journal of Real Estate Research, 24, 47­77.
McParland, C., A. Adair, and S. McGreal, 2002, "Valuation Standard - A Comparison of
four European Countries," Journal of Property Valuation and Investment, 20, 127­141.
25
Metz, C., 2002, "Private and Public Information in Self-Fulfilling Currency Crises," Jour-
nal of Economics, 76, 65­85.
Morgan, J. F., 1998, "The Natural History of Professionalization and Its Effect of Valua-
tion Theory and Practice in the UK and Germany," Journal of Property Valuation and
Investment, 16, 185­206.
Morris, S., and H. Shin, 2002, "Social Value of Public Information," American Economic
Review, 52, 1521­1534.
Plantin, G., H. Sapra, and H. Shin, 2005, "Marking-to-Market: Panacea or Pandora's
Box?," Mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.
Qi, J., 1994, "Bank Liquidity and Stability in an Overlapping Generations Model," Review
of Financial Studies, 7, 389­417.
Rochet, J.-C., and X. Vives, 2004, "Coordination Failures and the Lender of Last Resort:
Was Bagehot Right After All?," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2-6,
1116­1145.
Sebastian, S., and M. Tyrell, 2006, "Open End Real Estate Funds - Diamond or Danger?,"
Working Paper Goethe University Frankfurt.
26
27
The following Discussion Papers have been published since 2006:
Series 1: Economic Studies
1 2006 The dynamic relationship between the Euro
overnight rate, the ECB's policy rate and the Dieter Nautz
term spread Christian J. Offermanns
2 2006 Sticky prices in the euro area: a summary of Álvarez, Dhyne, Hoeberichts
new micro evidence Kwapil, Le Bihan, Lünnemann
Martins, Sabbatini, Stahl
Vermeulen, Vilmunen
3 2006 Going multinational: What are the effects
on home market performance? Robert Jäckle
4 2006 Exports versus FDI in German manufacturing:
firm performance and participation in inter- Jens Matthias Arnold
national markets Katrin Hussinger
5 2006 A disaggregated framework for the analysis of Kremer, Braz, Brosens
structural developments in public finances Langenus, Momigliano
Spolander
6 2006 Bond pricing when the short term interest rate Wolfgang Lemke
follows a threshold process Theofanis Archontakis
7 2006 Has the impact of key determinants of German
exports changed?
Results from estimations of Germany's intra
euro-area and extra euro-area exports Kerstin Stahn
8 2006 The coordination channel of foreign exchange Stefan Reitz
intervention: a nonlinear microstructural analysis Mark P. Taylor
9 2006 Capital, labour and productivity: What role do Antonio Bassanetti
they play in the potential GDP weakness of Jörg Döpke, Roberto Torrini
France, Germany and Italy? Roberta Zizza
28
10 2006 Real-time macroeconomic data and ex ante J. Döpke, D. Hartmann
predictability of stock returns C. Pierdzioch
11 2006 The role of real wage rigidity and labor market
frictions for unemployment and inflation Kai Christoffel
dynamics Tobias Linzert
12 2006 Forecasting the price of crude oil via
convenience yield predictions Thomas A. Knetsch
13 2006 Foreign direct investment in the enlarged EU:
do taxes matter and to what extent? Guntram B. Wolff
14 2006 Inflation and relative price variability in the euro Dieter Nautz
area: evidence from a panel threshold model Juliane Scharff
15 2006 Internalization and internationalization
under competing real options Jan Hendrik Fisch
16 2006 Consumer price adjustment under the
microscope: Germany in a period of low Johannes Hoffmann
inflation Jeong-Ryeol Kurz-Kim
17 2006 Identifying the role of labor markets Kai Christoffel
for monetary policy in an estimated Keith Küster
DSGE model Tobias Linzert
18 2006 Do monetary indicators (still) predict
euro area inflation? Boris Hofmann
19 2006 Fool the markets? Creative accounting, Kerstin Bernoth
fiscal transparency and sovereign risk premia Guntram B. Wolff
20 2006 How would formula apportionment in the EU
affect the distribution and the size of the Clemens Fuest
corporate tax base? An analysis based on Thomas Hemmelgarn
German multinationals Fred Ramb
29
21 2006 Monetary and fiscal policy interactions in a New
Keynesian model with capital accumulation Campbell Leith
and non-Ricardian consumers Leopold von Thadden
22 2006 Real-time forecasting and political stock market Martin Bohl, Jörg Döpke
anomalies: evidence for the U.S. Christian Pierdzioch
23 2006 A reappraisal of the evidence on PPP:
a systematic investigation into MA roots Christoph Fischer
in panel unit root tests and their implications Daniel Porath
24 2006 Margins of multinational labor substitution Sascha O. Becker
Marc-Andreas Mündler
25 2006 Forecasting with panel data Badi H. Baltagi
26 2006 Do actions speak louder than words? Atsushi Inoue
Household expectations of inflation based Lutz Kilian
on micro consumption data Fatma Burcu Kiraz
27 2006 Learning, structural instability and present H. Pesaran, D. Pettenuzzo
value calculations A. Timmermann
28 2006 Empirical Bayesian density forecasting in Kurt F. Lewis
Iowa and shrinkage for the Monte Carlo era Charles H. Whiteman
29 2006 The within-distribution business cycle dynamics Jörg Döpke
of German firms Sebastian Weber
30 2006 Dependence on external finance: an inherent George M. von Furstenberg
industry characteristic? Ulf von Kalckreuth
31 2006 Comovements and heterogeneity in the
euro area analyzed in a non-stationary
dynamic factor model Sandra Eickmeier
30
32 2006 Forecasting using a large number of predictors: Christine De Mol
is Bayesian regression a valid alternative to Domenico Giannone
principal components? Lucrezia Reichlin
33 2006 Real-time forecasting of GDP based on
a large factor model with monthly and Christian Schumacher
quarterly data Jörg Breitung
34 2006 Macroeconomic fluctuations and bank lending: S. Eickmeier
evidence for Germany and the euro area B. Hofmann, A. Worms
35 2006 Fiscal institutions, fiscal policy and Mark Hallerberg
sovereign risk premia Guntram B. Wolff
36 2006 Political risk and export promotion: C. Moser
evidence from Germany T. Nestmann, M. Wedow
37 2006 Has the export pricing behaviour of German
enterprises changed? Empirical evidence
from German sectoral export prices Kerstin Stahn
38 2006 How to treat benchmark revisions?
The case of German production and Thomas A. Knetsch
orders statistics Hans-Eggert Reimers
39 2006 How strong is the impact of exports and
other demand components on German
import demand? Evidence from euro-area
and non-euro-area imports Claudia Stirböck
40 2006 Does trade openness increase C. M. Buch, J. Döpke
firm-level volatility? H. Strotmann
41 2006 The macroeconomic effects of exogenous Kirsten H. Heppke-Falk
fiscal policy shocks in Germany: Jörn Tenhofen
a disaggregated SVAR analysis Guntram B. Wolff
31
42 2006 How good are dynamic factor models
at forecasting output and inflation? Sandra Eickmeier
A meta-analytic approach Christina Ziegler
43 2006 Regionalwährungen in Deutschland ­
Lokale Konkurrenz für den Euro? Gerhard Rösl
44 2006 Precautionary saving and income uncertainty
in Germany ­ new evidence from microdata Nikolaus Bartzsch
45 2006 The role of technology in M&As: a firm-level Rainer Frey
comparison of cross-border and domestic deals Katrin Hussinger
46 2006 Price adjustment in German manufacturing:
evidence from two merged surveys Harald Stahl
47 2006 A new mixed multiplicative-additive model
for seasonal adjustment Stephanus Arz
48 2006 Industries and the bank lending effects of Ivo J.M. Arnold
bank credit demand and monetary policy Clemens J.M. Kool
in Germany Katharina Raabe
01 2007 The effect of FDI on job separation Sascha O. Becker
Marc-Andreas Mündler
02 2007 Threshold dynamics of short-term interest rates:
empirical evidence and implications for the Theofanis Archontakis
term structure Wolfgang Lemke
32
Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies
01 2006 Forecasting stock market volatility with J. Döpke, D. Hartmann
macroeconomic variables in real time C. Pierdzioch
02 2006 Finance and growth in a bank-based economy: Michael Koetter
is it quantity or quality that matters? Michael Wedow
03 2006 Measuring business sector concentration
by an infection model Klaus Düllmann
04 2006 Heterogeneity in lending and sectoral Claudia M. Buch
growth: evidence from German Andrea Schertler
bank-level data Natalja von Westernhagen
05 2006 Does diversification improve the performance Evelyn Hayden
of German banks? Evidence from individual Daniel Porath
bank loan portfolios Natalja von Westernhagen
06 2006 Banks' regulatory buffers, liquidity networks Christian Merkl
and monetary policy transmission Stéphanie Stolz
07 2006 Empirical risk analysis of pension insurance ­ W. Gerke, F. Mager
the case of Germany T. Reinschmidt
C. Schmieder
08 2006 The stability of efficiency rankings when
risk-preferences and objectives are different Michael Koetter
09 2006 Sector concentration in loan portfolios Klaus Düllmann
and economic capital Nancy Masschelein
10 2006 The cost efficiency of German banks: E. Fiorentino
a comparison of SFA and DEA A. Karmann, M. Koetter
11 2006 Limits to international banking consolidation F. Fecht, H. P. Grüner
33
12 2006 Money market derivatives and the allocation Falko Fecht
of liquidity risk in the banking sector Hendrik Hakenes
01 2007 Granularity adjustment for Basel II Michael B. Gordy
Eva Lütkebohmert
02 2007 Efficient, profitable and safe banking:
an oxymoron? Evidence from a panel Michael Koetter
VAR approach Daniel Porath
03 2007 Slippery slopes of stress: ordered failure Thomas Kick
events in German banking Michael Koetter
04 2007 Open-end real estate funds in Germany ­ C. E. Bannier
genesis and crisis F. Fecht, M. Tyrell
35
Visiting researcher at the Deutsche Bundesbank
The Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt is looking for a visiting researcher. Among others
under certain conditions visiting researchers have access to a wide range of data in the
Bundesbank. They include micro data on firms and banks not available in the public.
Visitors should prepare a research project during their stay at the Bundesbank. Candidates
must hold a Ph D and be engaged in the field of either macroeconomics and monetary
economics, financial markets or international economics. Proposed research projects
should be from these fields. The visiting term will be from 3 to 6 months. Salary is
commensurate with experience.
Applicants are requested to send a CV, copies of recent papers, letters of reference and a
proposal for a research project to:
Deutsche Bundesbank
Personalabteilung
Wilhelm-Epstein-Str. 14
60431 Frankfurt
GERMANY
