SAGE Open
April-June 2012: 1
­5
© The Author(s) 2012
DOI: 10.1177/2158244012443544
http://sgo.sagepub.com
Introduction
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) have
had a long history of providing quality educational experi-
ences to underrepresented minority students (URMs).
Accounting for only 2% of the nation's colleges and univer-
sities, HBCUs award a significant number of degrees to
African American students at the bachelor's, master's, and
doctoral level across all academic disciplines. HBCUs have
also been instrumental in producing a significant number of
African American graduates in science and engineering
(National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources
Statistics, 2011). For all of the success HBCUs have had in
educating African American scientists and engineers, efforts
to broaden participation in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and STEM careers for
African Americans and other underserved ethnic groups
remain a prevailing issue in the educational system (Museus,
Palmer, Davis, & Maramba, 2011). The production and
implementation of online distance education courses and
online programs in science and engineering could offer addi-
tional avenues for minority-serving institutions to provide
students with increased opportunities to enroll in STEM
courses. Distance learning as defined by Greenberg (1998)
is a "planned teaching/learning experience that uses a wide
spectrum of technologies to reach learners at a distance and
is designed to encourage learner interaction and certification
of learning" (p. 36).
Recent data demonstrate that HBCUs and primarily White
institutions (PWIs) have a similar technological infrastruc-
ture in place for distance learning degree programs (Moore,
2008). This empirical finding would suggest that as HBCUs
are fully capable of implementing online programs, most of
these institutions would have taken full advantage of oppor-
tunities in distance learning for overall university advance-
ment. Unfortunately, most HBCUs in America do not offer
online programs in STEM fields; however, a few offer online
programs in non-STEM fields. Thus, the purpose of this
report is to examine African American students' participa-
tion in online distance education and to bring to light the
need for HBCUs to develop and enhance distance education
programs in STEM fields and other disciplines to increase
their academic competitiveness and sustainability. In addi-
tion, this article purports to offer specific research recom-
mendations for educational researchers exploring the issue
of increasing African American students and HBCU partici-
pation in online distance learning. Smith (2011) noted that
"HBCUs, which have traditionally provided an education for
443544
SGOXXX10.1177/215824
4012443544Flowers et al.SAGE Open
1Fayetteville State University, NC, USA
Corresponding Author:
Lawrence O. Flowers, Department of Biological Sciences, Fayetteville
State University, 225 Lyons Science Building, 1200 Murchison Road,
Fayetteville, NC 28301, USA
Email: lflowers@uncfsu.edu
African American Students' Participation
in Online Distance Education in STEM
Disciplines: Implications for HBCUs
Lawrence O. Flowers1, Erin N. White1,
James E. Raynor, Jr.1, and Sambit Bhattacharya1
Abstract
Despite the increase in online distant learning initiatives at many of the nation's colleges and universities, collectively, Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) continue to lag behind non-HBCUs in the development and implementation of
online courses and programs. Data produced by the National Center for Education Statistics show that African American
students are enrolled in significantly less distance education courses when compared with White students. In addition, there
is a substantial disparity in the number of online science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses and
programs when compared with online courses and programs in education, business, or the social sciences at HBCUs. The
primary aim of this article is to examine data that explore African American students' participation in distance education in
STEM disciplines. Recommendations for future research are also discussed in this article.
Keywords
online distance education, African American students, HBCU, STEM, educational research
2 SAGE Open
people who might not have otherwise had the opportunity,
have an imperative to take their programs online" (p. 25).
The lack of HBCU competitiveness in providing quality
online distance education programs for African American
students have forced significant numbers of African American
and other minority college students to consider for-profit
online universities such as Kaplan University and the
University of Phoenix. URMs are willing to pay exorbitant
tuitions even in the absence or in conjunction with federal
assistance to seek the convenience and advantages online
delivery methods provide (Poley, 2008). HBCU administra-
tors must take a more active role in implementing online
programs and courses on their campuses. HBCUs must con-
tinually study research literature and successful online edu-
cation models to transition from higher education institutions
with weak or nonexistent online programs to institutions
that provide high-quality online learning environments.
Furthermore, HBCU administrators must provide ongoing
academic and financial support to faculty committed to
teaching online. In addition, HBCUs must provide mecha-
nisms for sustainability of online programs such as faculty
training, technology enhancements, and procedures for
effective formative and summative assessments for online
courses and programs.
Many HBCUs have qualified faculty members who are
willing to engage in online teaching; however, they are faced
with conflicting attitudes and divergent dispositions from
obdurate administrators and department chairs who do not
appreciate the institutional advantages of offering online
courses. Moreover, based on the literature, there seems to be
consistent themes regarding HBCUs' lack of enthusiasm for
adopting online distance education programs including, but
not limited to, faculty and administration reluctance, expen-
sive start-up and instructional development costs, lack of
course facilitation expertise, perceived deficits in learning
outcomes, poor student perceptions and characteristics, and
accreditation issues (Allen & Seaman, 2007; Beasley, 2010;
Miller & Husmann, 1999; Poley, 2008). A major concern
among educators regarding online courses with laboratory
components is the perception that less skills are gained with
virtual labs due to the lack of hands-on activities when com-
pared with wet labs offered with face-to-face courses
(Jeschofnig & Spencer, 2008). However, previous studies
demonstrate the effectiveness and quality of online labs
(Wolf, 2010). Well-developed virtual labs provide interac-
tive experiences during which students observe and manipu-
late computer-generated objects, data, or phenomena to
fulfill the learning objectives of a laboratory experience
(Stuckey-Mickell & Stuckey-Danner, 2007). In fact, many
U.S. health professional schools incorporate the use of vir-
tual labs as major components of the medical education cur-
riculum (Lovell & Vignare, 2009).
The Sloan Consortium, an international professional
organization devoted to the improvement of online educa-
tion, recently described substantive student enrollments in
online courses in Class Differences: Online Education in the
United States. Allen and Seaman (2010) reported a 21%
growth rate for U.S. higher education student online enroll-
ments suggesting that online learning is becoming a more
viable teaching and learning strategy in the higher educa-
tional system. The Sloan Consortium also surveyed univer-
sity administrators to determine their perceptions regarding
the future of online education at their respective institutions.
Overwhelmingly, participants in the study viewed online
education initiatives favorably and believed that online edu-
cation could provide economic, teaching, and learning
transformative advantages. Moreover, several million U.S.
college/university students have reported enrolling in at least
one online course while pursing their academic degree (Allen
& Seaman, 2010).
Online education learning initiatives have continued to
soar over the last decade (Figure 2) and are widely recog-
nized to offer several significant benefits to academic institu-
tions. For example, successful online programs have been
shown to counteract reduced institutional budgets and
gloomy economic forecasts. The infusion of distance educa-
tion programs may present viable cost-effective strategies
for HBCUs to improve their overall revenue problems and
associated negative outcomes (e.g., abated course and aca-
demic program offerings, reduced student support services,
reduced faculty and staff, and reduced student enrollments).
Although there have been slight increases in historically
Black institutions with online degree programs, in 2010,
only 18% of the nation's 105 HBCUs possessed online
degree programs (Beasley, 2010). Furthermore, analysis
revealed that only 9% of the online programs at HBCUs are
in the STEM disciplines. In contrast, a higher percentage of
non-HBCUs have been reported to offer distance education
courses and programs.
There are many student advantages to taking an online
course such as the ability to learn at your own pace and the
opportunity for greater flexibility and convenience to com-
plete degree requirements while managing complex family,
social, and work schedules. Not surprising, a common theme
among students regarding the benefits of online courses is
the convenience of completing coursework and flexibility of
instructional strategies rarely utilized in the traditional class-
room. Numerous reports have also demonstrated that learn-
ing gains in online courses meet or exceed learning gains in
traditional courses (Bernard et al., 2004; Dell, Low, &
Wilker, 2010; Summers, Waigandt, & Whittaker, 2005;
Weber & Lennon, 2007). Moreover, results from a research
study conducted by Warren and Holloman (2005) revealed
that there are no significant differences in student learning
outcomes between online instruction and traditional instruc-
tion. In their study, two groups of students from the same
course were selected as participants and received the same
content via different modes. One group of students was ran-
domly selected for online instruction and another group of
students were randomly selected for traditional face-to-face
Flowers et al. 3
instruction. Data from pre- and postquantitative survey
instruments show minimal differences in understanding of
course content. Similar studies also provide support for
online distance learning instructional strategies as viable and
meaningful educational approaches. Using the hierarchical
linear model and multiple regression analysis, Chen,
Lambert, and Guidry (2010) reported that there is a positive
association between web-based learning technology partici-
pation and increased student engagement.
Method
Data Sources
Descriptive data were compiled using data from the National
Center for Education Statistics (Parsad & Lewis, 2008;
Waits & Lewis, 2003) and the HBCU Distance Learning
2010 report (Beasley, 2010). In addition, the current article
utilizes data from the 2007-2008 National Postsecondary
Student Aid Study data set designed to study college stu-
dents and postsecondary institutions. The NPSAS was con-
ducted by the NCES (Cominole, Riccobono, Siegel, &
Caves, 2010) and contained a student sample of more than
19 million undergraduate student participants from 2-year
and 4-year Title IV degree-granting postsecondary institu-
tions participants in the study. The descriptive variables
described in this report were accessed through the Data
Analysis System supported by NCES.
Variables
The percentage of HBCUs offering online degrees and other
academic institutions offering online courses were investi-
gated in this report using descriptive data (Figures 1 and 2).
To analyze the percentage distribution of African American
student participation in distance education by college major,
variables that measured the percentage of students enrolled
in a distance education course in 2007-2008 (DISTEDUC)
and identified STEM majors, non-STEM majors, and unde-
clared majors (STEMMAJ) were selected. Data sample
filters were used to create tables only including African
American students (Table 1). To analyze the distribution
of student participation in distance education by race, the
DISTEDUC and RACE variables were used to target
African American and White students (Figure 3).
Results
Figure 1 shows that 18% of the 105 HBCUs possess online
degree programs. Figure 2 shows that between 2000 and
2007, there was an increase in the number of 2-year and
4-year Title IV academic institutions that proffered online
courses. As shown in Table 1, very low percentages of
African American students with STEM majors enrolled in
an online course during 2007-2008. Figure 3 indicates that
White college students (83%) participated in far more dis-
tance education courses than African American college stu-
dents (17%) during the survey period. Independent-samples
t tests were employed to determine whether statistically
No Online Courses Offered
Online Courses Offered
44%
56%
44%
2000-01
34%
66%
2006-07
Figure 2. Percentage of 2-year and 4-year Title IV institutions
offering distance education courses:Trend analysis
Source: U.S. Department of Education.
HBCUs With Online Degrees
HBCUs Without Online Degrees
18%
82%
Figure 1. Percentage of HBCUs offering online degrees
Note: HBCU = Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Adapted from
Beasley (2010).
Table 1. Percentage Distribution of African American Students'
Participation in Distance Education
Major field STEM majors
Non-STEM
majors
Undeclared
majors
Distance education
course (%)
10.8 78.1 11.1
Source: U.S. Department of Education.
Note: Data were significant at the p < .05 level.
African American
White
0
20
40
60
80
100
17%
83%
Figure 3. Percentage distribution of student participation in
distance education by race
Source: U.S. Department of Education.
Note: Data were significant at the p < .05 level.
4 SAGE Open
significant differences were present (Table 1 and Figure 3).
All of the results were reported significant at the p < .05 level.
Discussion and Implications
Advancing educational opportunities for HBCU students
must remain at the forefront of HBCU stakeholders. In this
article, we proposed that many HBCUs must examine and
enhance their online distance education initiatives to keep
pace with the ever-changing educational landscape. It is
imperative that HBCUs fully engage and invest in online
education, particularly in STEM online courses and pro-
grams. An increased emphasis in the development of online
STEM courses and STEM degree programs at HBCUs is
needed to provide African American students more options
to pursue degrees in science and engineering. This article
presents data from the NCES and other sources that supports
the assertion that an extremely low percentage of HBCUs
offer online degrees (Figure 1), that African American
STEM majors enroll in far less online courses when com-
pared with non-STEM majors (Table 1), and that African
American students have fallen behind White students in the
area of online course matriculation (Figure 3).
Due to the dearth of research literature in this area, this
article advocates the infusion of quality research studies
designed to encourage the development and implementa-
tion of online courses and degree programs at HBCUs. In
addition, there are a limited number of research articles that
explore HBCU students' learning styles, educational out-
comes, and experiences in STEM online courses. It is envi-
sioned that future quantitative and qualitative research
findings will facilitate original research, theories, policies,
and practices designed to improve minority participation in
the online experience and may subsequently induce gains
in minority and women access in STEM fields to address
science and engineering workforce diversity problems.
Future Directions
Employing mixed-methods research designs, educational
researchers must collect data to highlight potential advantages
of online learning in STEM. Inevitably, the infusion of rigor-
ous empirical research studies comparing cognitive and affec-
tive outcomes in traditional versus fully online STEM courses
must be performed to address the shortage of educational lit-
erature on this topic (Phipps & Merisotis, 1999). To address
the scarcity of research devoted to distance education and
HBCUs, the corresponding author is near completion of a
study titled "Examining the Impact of Online Distance
Education on Student Learning and Student Engagement in
STEM Disciplines at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities." The study was designed to collect quantitative
and qualitative data from HBCU students enrolled in online
STEM courses. A quantitative survey was distributed to a
sample of HBCU undergraduate students enrolled in online
distance education courses in the STEM disciplines and to
undergraduate students enrolled in traditional STEM courses.
The qualitative component of the study was designed to
examine similarities and differences in educational outcomes
between HBCU undergraduate students enrolled in online and
traditional STEM courses. The research findings of the afore-
mentioned research project will provide beneficial informa-
tion regarding the extent to which online courses in the STEM
disciplines enhance student learning and student engagement.
Moreover, the data from the educational research project will
be used to facilitate the development of student-centered
pedagogical strategies that enhance online learning experi-
ences that complement students' learning styles and provide a
fundamental knowledge of the subject matter. The reliable
research design employed in the study will serve as a research
model that can be replicated to investigate factors that explore
educational strategies to improve online and traditional
courses in STEM disciplines at HBCUs and other academic
institutions. Active dissemination of empirical research stud-
ies examining online teaching and learning strategies will
better educate HBCU faculty and administrators regarding the
financial, pedagogical, and cognitive advantages of online
courses and degree programs in STEM.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) received the following financial support for the
research and/or authorship of this article:
This work was supported by a grant funded by the National
Science Foundation (HRD-0811728).
References
Allen, I., & Seaman, J. (2007). Online nation: Five years of growth
online. Needham, MA: Sloan Consortium.
Allen, I., & Seaman, J. (2010). Class differences: Online education
in the United States. Newburyport, MA: Sloan.
Beasley, R. (2010). HBCU distance learning 2010. Howard Uni-
versity's Digital Learning Lab (DLL). Retrieved from http://
www.dll.org/hbcus/DistanceLearning_Nov2010/HBCU-
Distance-Learning-2010-Final-21Nov10.pdf
Bernard, R., Abrami, P., Lou, Y., Borokhovski, E., Wade, A.,
Wozney, L., & . . .Huang, B. (2004). How does distance
education compare with classroom instruction? A meta-analysis
of the empirical literature. Review of Educational Research, 74,
379-439.
Chen, P., Lambert, A., & Guidry, K. (2010). Engaging online
learners: The impact of web-based learning technology on
college student engagement. Computers & Education, 54,
1222-1232.
Cominole, M., Riccobono, J., Siegel, P., & Caves, L. (2010). 2007-
08 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS:08) full-
scale methodology report (NCES 2011-188). Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education.
Flowers et al. 5
Dell, C., Low, C., & Wilker, J. (2010). Comparing student achieve-
ment in online and face-to-face class formats. Journal of Online
Learning and Teaching, 6, 30-42.
Greenberg, G. (1998). Distance education technologies: Best prac-
tices for K-12 settings. IEEE Technology and Society Maga-
zine, 17, 36-40.
Jeschofnig, P., & Spencer, C. (2008). Success in online vs. on-campus
lab science courses. Presented at the 14th Annual Sloan-C Con-
ference, Orlando, FL.
Lovell, K., & Vignare, K. (2009). MSU medical colleges blended
learning for first year science courses: Uniting pedagogy to
maximize experience and real world limitations. Journal of
Asynchronous Learning Networks, 13, 55-63.
Miller, M., & Husmann, D. (1999). Student perceptions of improv-
ing success in courses offered through distance education.
Planning and Changing, 25, 107-116.
Moore, B. (2008). Distance education: The readiness of the
nation's historically Black colleges and universities. Available
from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (ProQuest
Document ID: 1583960621)
Museus, S., Palmer, R., Davis, R., & Maramba, D. (2011). Special
issue: Racial and ethnic minority students' success in STEM
education. ASHE Higher Education Report, 36, 1-140.
National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Sta-
tistics. (2011). Women, minorities, and persons with disabilities
in science and engineering: 2011 (Special Report NSF 11-309).
Arlington, VA. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/
wmpd/
Parsad, B., & Lewis, L. (2008). Distance education at degree-
granting postsecondary institutions: 2006-07 (NCES 2009-
044). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Phipps, R., & Merisotis, J. (1999). What's the difference? A review
of contemporary research on the effectiveness of distance
learning in higher education. A Report from The Institute for
Higher Education Policy. Retrieved from http://www.ihep.org/
assets/files/publications/s-z/WhatDifference.pdf
Poley, J. (2008). Asynchronous learning networks: Policy implica-
tions for minority serving institutions and for leaders addressing
needs of minority learners. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, 12, 73-82.
Smith, R. (2011). HBCUs must embrace online education. Diverse
Issues in Higher Education, 28, 25.
Stuckey-Mickell, T., & Stuckey-Danner, B. (2007). Virtual labs
in the online biology course: Student perceptions of effective-
ness and usability. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching,
3, 105-110. Retrieved from http://jolt.merlot.org/vol3no2/
stuckey.pdf
Summers, J., Waigandt, A., & Whittaker, T. (2005). A comparison
of student achievement and satisfaction in an online versus a
traditional face-to-face statistics class. Innovative Higher Edu-
cation, 29, 233-250.
Waits, T., & Lewis, L. (2003). Distance education at degree-grant-
ing postsecondary institutions: 2000-2001 (NCES 2003-017).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Cen-
ter for Education Statistics.
Warren, L., & Holloman, H. (2005). On-line instruction: Are the
outcomes the same? Journal of Instructional Psychology, 32,
148-151.
Weber, J., & Lennon, R. (2007). Multi-course comparison of tra-
ditional versus web-based course delivery systems. Journal of
Educators Online, 4, 1-19.
Wolf, T. (2010). Assessing student learning in a virtual laboratory
environment. IEEE Transactions on Education, 53, 216-222.
Bios
Lawrence O. Flowers is an Assistant Professor of Microbiology at
Fayetteville State University.
Erin N. White is an Assistant Professor of Biology at Fayetteville
State University.
James E. Raynor, Jr. is an Associate Professor of Cellular and
Molecular Biology at Fayetteville State University.
Sambit Bhattacharya is an Assistant Professor in Computer
Science at Fayetteville State University
