SAGE Open
January-March 2013: 1
­7
© The Author(s) 2013
DOI: 10.1177/2158244013480789
http://sgo.sagepub.com
Introduction
It is well documented that our K-12 schools contain a grow-
ing number of diverse learners, with data indicating that
nearly six million students with disabilities spend a portion
of their school day in inclusive settings (U.S. Department of
Education, 2002). A promising approach to addressing the
needs of students with disabilities in the general education
classroom is Universal Design for Learning (UDL; Jackson,
Harper, & Jackson, 2001). The Center for Applied Special
Technology (CAST; http://www.cast.org) notes that, "UDL
provides a blueprint for creating flexible goals, methods,
materials, and assessments that accommodate learner differ-
ences." In designing their UDL model, CAST used informa-
tion on brain processing and their own brain research. From
this, they deducted that while each brain processes informa-
tion in a unique manner, there are three specific areas or
networks of the brain associated with learning. Their UDL
model provides educators with ways to support students in
each of these identified brain networks and also promotes
the use of technology as a key component for teaching and
learning in diverse classroom environments.
The UDL model aligns with No Child Left Behind Act
(NCLB; 2001) and Individuals With Disabilities Education
Act (IDEA; 2004) by promoting the use of ongoing assess-
ment and usage of scientifically researched strategies to sup-
port students. Furthermore, IDEA (2004) mandates that
universal design be used as an intervention to assist students
with disabilities in participating more fully in the general
education curriculum. Equally important, research focusing
on the needs of special educators indicates that special edu-
cators benefit from training in adapting curriculum and
working collaboratively with general educators, coteaching,
and providing necessary supports to promote learning for
students with disabilities in inclusive classrooms (Brownell,
Ross, Colon, & McCallum, 2005; Fisher, Frey, & Thousand,
2003). With this in mind, we created a hybrid special educa-
tion course that used UDL and made it available to graduate
students of special education.
This article focuses on a case study of the experiences of
five special educators who participated in our hybrid course
that incorporated the UDL model. The case study design
allowed us to gather rich, descriptive data that illuminated
the experiences of the special educators and helped us under-
stand how they interpreted what they learned in the course
and translated it to practice. In an executive summary report
on teacher education for the American Educational Research
Association, Cochran-Smith and Zeichner (2005) point out
the need for this type of case study research to shed light on
"what teacher education students learn from the opportuni-
ties they are provided within their programs" (p. 30). We
begin with a description of the course construct. The
480789
SGOXXX10.1177/2158244013480789S
AGE OpenElder Hinshaw and Sakalli Gumus
2013
1Indiana State University,Terre Haute, USA
2Mustafa Kemal University,Antakya,Turkey
Corresponding Author:
Rebecca Elder Hinshaw, Indiana State University, 7th street,
Terre Haute, IN 47809, USA.
Email: rebecca.hinshaw@indstate.edu
Universal Design for Learning Principles in a
Hybrid Course: Perceptions and Practice
Rebecca Elder Hinshaw1 and Suad Sakalli Gumus2
Abstract
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a promising approach of differentiating instruction to meet the needs of all students.
While differentiation is not unique to special educators, it is an expectation of the profession that special educators know
ways to differentiate instruction to meet the needs of diverse learners. Furthermore, as more practicing educators seek out
online education opportunities offered by teacher education programs, it is beneficial that instructors understand how these
participants interpret what they learn and translate it into practice. This article focuses on a case study of the experiences
of five special educators who participated in a hybrid graduate course using UDL concepts. The case study design utilized
interviews, observation, and course products. Inductive data analysis uncovered three emerging themes that corresponded
to the participants' perception and practice of UDL.
Keywords
Universal Design, hybrid, teacher education
2 SAGE Open
"Method" section follows with information about the study
and design. We will then present the results in relationship to
the three themes. We will conclude with the discussion of
implications.
Course Construct
Online teaching and learning has become a vital part of
higher education programs and a necessity for adult learners
who not only want to continue their education but also have
job commitments that make face-to-face course attendance
difficult (Cowie & Nichols, 2010). Our hybrid design
allowed us to have some face-to-face contact with the par-
ticipants, but the majority of the course was in an online
platform. The course had two face-to-face group meetings,
online communication via scheduled discussions and reflec-
tive journal postings, a drop box area for completed projects,
and web access to a text by David H. Rose and Anne Meyer
(2002), Teaching Every Student in the Digital Age: Universal
Design for Learning. Because the course had a practicum
element, the instructor also observed each participant teach
two lessons; the first was a lesson of choice and the second
was a lesson that was part of their culminating UDL projects.
Method
Setting
The hybrid course was a culminating graduate course in
special education, taught at a midwestern university. The
course was designed as the final course in fulfillment of
requirements for a master's degree in special education.
Objectives
The objectives of this study were to provide insight into the
experiences of special educators who participate in the
course and to discover how they perceived and practiced
UDL. Because the special educators had varied undergradu-
ate backgrounds, skills, and teaching assignments, a portrait
of their experiences was valuable to our understanding of
how learning is transferred to practice.
Instructor
At the time of the study, the instructor (pseudonym, Annah)
was a doctoral student who had been a special educator in
Turkey. She had taught and supervised both undergraduate
and graduate students in a variety of courses, including dis-
tant education courses. She was known for her versatility,
attention to details, and innate ability to provide encourage-
ment and supportive, constructive feedback to her students.
To provide a glimpse into her relationship with each of
the graduate students in the course, examples of her interac-
tions are included in the following section.
Participants
All five of the special educators enrolled in the course
agreed to participate in the study. Four of the participants
held positions as special educators in various locations
within a 3-hr radius of our campus, while the fifth one was
not working and was placed in a local school for the practi-
cum component of the course. Four of the participants were
female and one was male. They were all in their mid- to late
20s. Pseudonyms were used in place of the special educa-
tors' names. A brief introduction of each and their experi-
ences in the course follows.
Heather worked as a special educator in a large, rural high
school. She began the course with anxiety over the course
material. In the first meeting, she took extensive notes while
Annah explained the passed out materials, presented infor-
mation about UDL through PowerPoint presentations, and
explained the course expectations, plans, and answered
questions. Heather asked questions about UDL and the proj-
ect, whichAnnah responded to, reassuring her that she would
understand more once she began reading the text. Throughout
the course, Heather read her assignments, was actively
engaged in the online communications with Annah and the
other graduate students, and readily applied what she had
learned to her coteaching experience. Heather ended the
course with seeing the benefits of the flexibility that UDL
advocates for students and teachers alike.
Connie was a full-time international student from Taiwan
who was placed in a local fourth-grade elementary class-
room for the practicum experience. While Annah chose
Connie's placement and general educator, Connie was
pleased with the selection and spoke favorably of the general
educator in her online communications. Annah responded to
Connie's postings and was happy that Connie was pleased
with the placement and the teacher. As for UDL, Connie saw
it as a method of reaching out to all students through multi-
media and technology--especially those with English as a
second language.
Ally worked as a special educator in a midsized, urban
city elementary school, K-6. In the first meeting, she greeted
Annah with a smile and hug and related her delight in having
Annah for an instructor again. Ally was confident in her abil-
ity to successfully complete all of the course requirements.
Being a practicing coteacher, she was able to have ready
access to all the students in the general education classroom
as well as a working relationship with a collaborative general
educator. In her online communications, she often shared her
own teaching strategies in the general education classroom
and pointed out how they corresponded with UDL.
Deanna worked as a special educator at a local, private,
postsecondary facility created to support young adults diag-
nosed with Asperger's Syndrome and other forms of autism.
She began the course with an idea of what UDL involved and
was intrigued by the concepts presented. In her first online
forum, she requested more information on how the three
Elder Hinshaw and Sakalli Gumus 3
brain networks functioned and Annah responded by provid-
ing Deanna with a link to an online version of a book on
neuroscience that referenced brain research and conclusions
similar to UDL. Annah gave Deanna specific pages to read
and also suggested that the references cited in the book might
provide additional resources. Concerning collaboration and
coteaching, Deanna was the only one unable to work as a
coteacher. In her online journal, Deanna posted her frustra-
tions and Annah responded by sympathizing with her situa-
tion and encouraging her to continue persevering. She
expressed her sadness in the fact that Deanna was not able to
collaborate. Annah pointed out that as professionals, teach-
ers are constantly being expected to collaborate with para-
professionals, parents, and other members of the community.
She suggested that Deanna make a renewed effort to try to
work with the other teacher and include him in her planning
and teaching. Although she did not coteach, Deanna did suc-
cessfully complete the course.
The last participant was Steve, who worked as a learning
disabilities (LD) teacher in a midsized, urban city middle
school. He began the course with apprehension about UDL
because he had little opportunity to coteach. In the first meet-
ing, he talked about his unique teaching environment and
was worried about how he could complete the project. He
solicitedAnnah for ideas on how to fulfill the project require-
ments of collaborating with a general education teacher
given that he worked with students only in his resource room
and none in the general education classrooms.Annah assured
him that everything would work out and she would be there
to help him. They talked about ways to approach the general
educators in his school. He agreed that he was hopeful that
he would find someone with whom to work. He did find a
coteacher and ended the course with describing how the
UDL project and technology enabled him to coteach on a
more permanent basis.
Data Collection and Analysis
The first author conducted three semistructured audiotaped
interviews and four observations of the participants, at vari-
ous points in the course. To maintain confidentiality, code
numbers rather than names identified all data, and audio-
tapes were erased after transcripts were completed. The
participants' course products were also instrumental in
understanding their perceptions. With their permissions, the
following products were obtained: transcripts of the two
asynchronous (forum) and one synchronous (chat) discus-
sions, weekly reflective online journal entries, and the
course project involving a four-lesson unit plan applying
UDL principles. Identifying information on all products was
also removed and the products were coded.
Data analysis was conducted using the procedures
described in qualitative research texts (McMillan &
Schumacher, 2001; Merriam, 1998). This involved organizing
the data, analyzing the data using the constant comparative
method, and interpreting the results. To organize the data, sep-
arate folders for data sets were created for each participant,
along with folders for the transcripts of each of the two discus-
sion forums and one discussion chat. All data in each set were
read several times, with ideas noted in the margins of the data
sets. These noted ideas were used to create a topic list Word
document for each data set. Data set topic lists were compared
with one another, duplications of topics were eliminated and
similar topics were combined into a broader topic and renamed
to reflect the combined idea. A master Word document topic
list encompassing all the data sets was created. This Word
document topic list contained 14 initial topics. Using the con-
stant comparative method, each topic document was reexam-
ined, commonalities between topics compared, and data
reduction occurred due to the overlapping and collapsing of
topics. The resulting topics were then developed into catego-
ries. These categories "reflect the purpose of the research"
(Merriam, 1998, p. 183) and were exclusive. All data were
reexamined using the categories, and data not assigned to cat-
egories, simply responses and restatement of textbook infor-
mation, were put aside and not used. Further analysis of these
categories resulted in the emergence of three major themes.
Eisner (1998) relates that themes are "those recurring mes-
sages construed from the events observed" (p. 189).
The issue of trustworthiness was addressed using three
methods: triangulation, peer debriefing, and member checks.
Triangulation was accomplished by using multiple partici-
pants and cross-participants analysis of interview data,
course artifact collection, and classroom observations.
During the interpretation phase, a peer debriefer read drafts
of the coded information and provided questions for further
interpretation. She judged the coding and theme analysis as
being consistent and representative of the data overall.
Member checks involved enlisting the help of interviewees
in reviewing and determining the accuracy of transcripts and
information derived from interviews (Brantlinger, Jimenez,
Klingner, Pugach, & Richardson, 2005). The interviewed
participants received a copy of one of their transcripts and a
copy of their case information. They were asked whether
they agreed with their transcript and their case information.
Minor discrepancies were noted on two of the cases, and
changes were made to reflect the accurate information.
Results
Three common themes emerged from the cross-case data.
These themes appeared across data types and represented the
participants' perceptions and practice of UDL.
Theme 1: Making the Connection
Reflection is a key element in teaching and also a key
component of the course. The design of the hybrid course
allowed interaction and reflection to occur with the
instructor, between the participants and in reference to the
4 SAGE Open
material. The participants were expected to reflect on their
learning and teaching, throughout the course. The idea that
reflection provided an opportunity to connect and apply
what they have learned in their own teaching was some-
times apparent in the ways that some participants
responded. Some consistently sought out ways to connect
what they were learning about UDL with prior knowledge
and present teaching experiences. Supporting the practi-
cum reflection, Heather stated in an interview, "I like
some sort of weekly reflection, whether it is the chat or the
journal. I like reading other peoples thoughts." Like
Heather, Ally valued learning and connecting with her fel-
low graduate students through reading the online postings:
"being able to listen to what they were having problems
with and what they were really enjoying and it kind of
made you thankful of what you had or that would be neat
to try."
In her second journal entry, Heather reflected on the
assigned reading and then connected the ideas with a teach-
ing situation:
Chapter five really put into perspective of how I am
going to align goals with standards using UDL. The
goals need to be broader. For example in an English
class where the goal is: "Write a five paragraph essay
about your future goals in life." Why does the prompt
have to be about goals or why does it necessarily need
to be five paragraphs? Students may have trouble writ-
ing and five paragraphs are too much or they may feel
anxious about the future. The teacher should first
identify what he/she really wants students to accom-
plish, such as: being able to write a thesis statement
with a supporting paragraph.
In Journal 3, Steve reflected on the ideas presented in the
text and then discussed ways he could apply them to his own
teaching:
I can do a couple of different things to customize my
curriculum and instruction to cater to the brain net-
works . . . The first is providing multiple examples to
the students to provide them a variety of ways to hear
the same concept that we are covering. The second one
that I use is providing multiple media and formats for
the students to learn the concept.
In her fourth journal entry, Ally wrote about a resource
about teaching strategies and how she used the described
activity in her own teaching:
I really enjoyed the kind of "pre-test" that the teacher
did at the beginning to see how much the students
already knew about each of the strategies. I myself am
a big fan of pre-test/post-test data and information.
The pre-test can help me with what each individual
student's weaknesses and strengths are which will
help me guide my instruction and grouping for les-
sons. The post-test also shows the growth of the stu-
dents and who still needs some work and the areas that
they need that work.
Whereas most used reflection as a way to connect and
evaluate their teaching experiences, some did not. For
instance, in Deanna's online communications, she frequently
wrote about the brain networks but did not reveal if the UDL
information was important in her present teaching environ-
ment. Although Connie did discuss the benefits of using
UDL to support students, she rarely shared her prior learning
or prior teaching experiences.
Across the data sets and types, the participants also con-
sistently talked about teaching and meeting the needs of stu-
dents. Upon learning about the UDL concepts of recognition,
strategic, and affective networks, the participants readily
used the information to describe how they taught and how
their students learned. They could see the connection
between what they were learning about UDL, with ways to
teach their students. With their UDL projects, they had an
opportunity to apply their UDL information to a teaching
situation. As with reflection, there was variability to the
extent that the course provided them with new information
about teaching diverse students. Hence, the UDL compo-
nents incorporated in the course did provide them with ways
to support their diverse learners, but only two participants
described ways UDL enhanced their teaching. For example,
Heather talked about learning and applying the UDL con-
cepts in an interview:
I really like it, I mean I thought well this is kind of
stuff we do anyway like when I first read it. But it
really breaks it down to more specifics and it gives
you the purpose, you know, why is the strategic net-
work important? Why should we teach to this net-
work? So really kind of laid out for me, like oh yeah
now I know and when I applied it I could see how it
worked.
And in her first journal entry, Connie wrote this about the
recognition network and teaching students:
For example, when we are at school, we teach stu-
dents new things and new words everyday. If there is
a student who cannot recognize different things,
words or sounds clearly, it will be so hard for this
student to learn new things and make connections
between old things and new things. This student will
feel confused and frustrated when he/she is at school.
This student cannot understand what they should do
at which time.
Elder Hinshaw and Sakalli Gumus 5
Theme 2:Teaching and Efficacy
The ability to collaborate and work with others to share
resources and skills are important attributes of special edu-
cators. With the course's online interaction, the participants
became a cohort or community of learners working and col-
laborating together. With their UDL projects, the partici-
pants had to collaborate and coteach with a general educator.
The ability to collaborate in each of these venues allowed
the participants to validate and strengthen their own teaching
skills and self-worth.
Overall findings indicate that the practicum component of
the course provided them with an opportunity to learn about
collaboration. In their online communications, projects, and
interviews, they talked about the characteristics of their gen-
eral educators and even challenges of their collaborative rela-
tionships.Allygaveherexperiencedinsightsintocollaborating
in Forum 1: "Some teachers who have been teaching for a
while may not be as open and willing to change. Even some
general education teachers find it difficult to share and open
their classroom to another teacher." In the same forum,
Heather had this to say about implementing UDL:
My fear is that general education teachers may think
that special education teachers only do the special ed.
part and gen. ed only does their part, and therefore it
won't end up being practical UDL but just a special ed
teacher "helping out."
Heather later reported in her Project D, her initial strug-
gles with her coteacher:
She initially seemed excited to be involved with this
project, but once we started I felt like I was doing
more of the work. She didn't seem to give much input
and always said, "I'll do whatever you want to do" . .
. She never worked with a special education teacher
before because she taught at a private school and there
weren't any students there who received special ser-
vices. That could be one reason why she and I started
off struggling, because she wasn't use to working with
someone else.
Although challenging, the participants did relate the
rewards of the collaborative experience that the practicum
made available to them. They talked about the virtues of
being in the general education classroom and working side
by side with the general education teacher. For example,
through observation data, both Heather's and Connie's sec-
ond lessons using UDL proved to be far better for them and
their students, thereby enhancing their self-efficacy. Connie's
students were engaged, listening and participating in the les-
son. For Heather, the change came in how she was teaching
and interacting with the students. She was not acting as
simply support, but had a true partnership in teaching the
lesson. Heather related this in Part D of her project:
But, despite our initial struggles we soon were on track
and working side by side. She really came to the fore-
front of this project when we started planning lessons.
She had all sorts of ideas and was excited to integrate
them. She also kept me on my toes by always thinking
about how we could change it to make it better and she
would immediately reflect on a lesson after we taught
it to see if we should change anything for the next class
coming in. She was supportive of my ideas and I was
of hers. We also worked great together when it was
time to teach. We had fun and so did the students. We
both think classes always go so much better when both
of us are able to teach and manage the class. I'm really
glad we were able to work well together because I
think we put out a great UDL project.
Ally also believed that the collaboration gave her an
opportunity to share UDL. In her last interview, when ques-
tioned about collaborating and using UDL for the following
school year,Ally said, "Well, we're going to have those strat-
egies from the UDL, the planning technique. Identifying the
barriers and things like that that are definitely going to influ-
ence our planning and we're going to think about that."
For Steve, the collaborative experience brought desired
changes in his teaching for the next school year. He related in
his last interview that he would be coteaching four classes
for the following school year with the coteacher he had
worked with on the project. Concerning UDL and the col-
laboration that the practicum required, he wrote in Section D
of his project,
The project opened up the door to a co-teaching
opportunity that I may not have had otherwise. I think
had I just asked for a teacher to co-teach together, I
don't think I would have the response I had asking for
some help to complete my project for this class. My
cooperating teacher's initial response was sure, "I'll
help you." I don't think she was expecting the kind of
experience that she received from the actually helping
me. I did really get a chance to debrief like I had
hoped. My overall impression from my cooperating
teacher was that she had a very positive experience in
the co-teaching. I believe that she gained some insight
about UDL principles and the effect they can have on
student learning.
Theme 3:Tools toTeach
A key component of the course and UDL was the use of
technology to support learning and teaching. With the hybrid
course, the participants were expected to access information
6 SAGE Open
about UDL and interact with one another. In designing their
UDL projects, the participants were required to include ele-
ments of technology in their teaching. All were familiar with
the use of computers and multimedia in their own learning
and related this in their online communications and inter-
views. They acknowledged the benefits of using technology
as a tool to teach. Specifically, Connie, Deanna, and Ally
used technology to support their instruction. Heather had her
students use computers to access online information, and
Steve used his laptop and portable projector in teaching and
had the students use computers to take tests.
Deanna talked about using computers as a tool for her
students' learning in an interview:
What I've learned, which I guess it's changed in the 10
years since I went and got my undergrad, is the huge
emphasis on on-line, and how what a difference that
makes . . . it's how everything is out there, it's on-line.
If you're doing any kind of research of any kind, you
start there.
Steve, who was very comfortable with technology, was
observed using an overhead projector and his personal com-
puter in the observation of his first lesson. In an observation
of his UDL lesson, he used his computer and digital projector
to give a PowerPoint presentation and also had the students
take a posttest on their computers. Before his UDL lesson,
Steve wrote in Journal 6,
My collaborating teacher is excited about integrating
the technology into the unit and also into her class-
room. We have not yet taught any part of the unit yet
but I think she is excited to try the technology. I hope
to have her administer the post-test on Blackboard at
the conclusion of our unit. Also with the use of our
tablets and the digital projector I think she will find a
new way to utilize her tablet in her own classroom the
remainder of this year.
Implications
Data indicate that the graduate students in this case study
demonstrated improved understanding and use of UDL
after this hybrid class. Also, the reflection requirements of
the course assisted in the establishment of a cohort of
learners who jointly constructed an understanding of the
UDL concepts. The formats of the online group discus-
sions and resulting collaborative responding allowed the
graduate students to provide support and encouragement
to one another. The online communication was also a
place for them to share stories of their teaching experi-
ences. As they learned more about the UDL model, some
correlated the new UDL information with their own teach-
ing techniques, reflected on their individual experiences
of using UDL at their practicum sites, and shared informa-
tion about their UDL projects.
As the graduate students continued to apply the UDL
model in collaboration, they related in their online communi-
cations and project sections, feeling a sense of empowerment
when they were able to plan instruction in the general educa-
tion classroom for all students, share knowledge about using
technology, and work as a coteacher. In their online commu-
nications and interviews, most referenced the new ideas of
using technology that supported each of the three brain net-
works and discussed how they could use technology to offer
greater support to their students.
The case study also revealed the important role that the
instructor played in the hybrid course. Supportive and active
field experience supervisors are an essential element of best
practices in teacher education programs (Wideen, Mayer-
Smith, & Moon, 1998). This study indicated that the instruc-
tor's nurturing nature, encouragement, and knowledge of
UDL and the practicum requirements, all came together to
provide the graduate students with the support they needed
to succeed. She was a mentor, a confidante, a disciplinar-
ian--a teacher. Her continual attention let them know that
they were not alone in their endeavors and that she not only
believed in them but also supported them.
Our case study data indicated that the UDL model intro-
duced in the course provided the graduate students with a
welcomed instructional format to enhance the learning expe-
riences of their students with disabilities in inclusive set-
tings, an effective means to support a collaborative
coteaching partnership in the general education classroom,
and opportunities to explore greater integration of technol-
ogy in their teaching. Teacher education programs and
instructors can reference this study as a way to support skill
acquisition and practicum obligations in a hybrid course.
This study also adds to the literature on developing the infra-
structure in schools to meet the needs of students with dis-
abilities in the general education classroom.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research and/or
authorship of this article.
References
Brantlinger, E., Jimenez, R., Klingner, J., Pugach, M., & Richard-
son, V. (2005). Qualitative studies in special education. Excep-
tional Children, 71, 195-207.
Brownell, M. T., Ross, D. D., Colon, E. P., & McCallum, C. L.
(2005). Critical features of special education teacher prepara-
tion: A comparison with general teacher education. Journal of
Special Education, 38, 242-252.
Elder Hinshaw and Sakalli Gumus 7
Cochran-Smith, M., & Zeichner, K. M. (2005). Executive summary:
The report of the AERA panel on research and teacher educa-
tion. In M. Cochran-Smith & K. M. Zeichner (Eds.), Studying
teacher education (pp. 1-36). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cowie, P., & Nichols, M. (2010). The clash of cultures: Hybrid
learning course development as management of tension. Jour-
nal of Distance Education, 24(1), 77-90.
Eisner, E. W. (1998). Do qualitative case studies have lessons
to teach? The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and the
enhancement of educational practice (pp. 197-212). Upper
Saddle River: NJ, Pearson Education Company.
Fisher, D., Frey, N., & Thousand, J. (2003). What do special educa-
tors need to know and be prepared to do for inclusive schooling
to work? Teacher Education and Special Education, 26, 42-50.
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act. (2004). Available from
http://idea.ed.gov/
Jackson, R., Harper, K., & Jackson, J. (2001). Effective teaching
practices and the barriers limiting their use in accessing the
curriculum: A review of recent literature. Peabody, MA: Center
for Applied Special Technology. Retrieved from http://www
.cast.org/publications/ncac/ncac_effectivetp.html
McMillan, J. H., & Schumacher, S. (2001). Qualitative data
analysis. Research in education: A conceptual introduction
(pp. 460-494). New York. Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study appli-
cations in education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
No Child Left Behind Act. (2001). Retrieved from http://www2.
ed.gov/nclb/landing.jhtml
Rose, D. H., & Meyer, A. (2002). Teaching every student in the
digital age: Universal design for learning. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Education Press.
U.S. Department of Education. (2002). To assure the free appropri-
ate public education of all children with disabilities: Twenty-
third annual report to Congress on the implementation of The
Individual With Disabilities Education Act. Washington, DC:
Office of Special Education Programs.
Wideen, M., Mayer-Smith, J., & Moon, B. (1998). A critical analy-
sis of the research on learning to teach: Making the case for
an ecological perspective on inquiry. Review of Education
Research, 68, 130-178.
Author Biographies
Dr. Elder Hinshaw teaches undergraduate and graduate courses at
Indiana State University. Her research interests include special
education teacher education, assistive technology, UDL, differenti-
ated instruction, collaboration and co-teaching.
Dr. Sakalli Gumus is an Associate Professor of Special Education
at Mustafa Kemal University in Turkey. Her research interests are
students at risk, students with high incidence disabilities, students
with Autism, assistive technologies, teacher education, assessment,
universal design for learning and curricular design.
