SAGE Open
January-March 2013: 1
­10
© The Author(s) 2013
DOI: 10.1177/2158244013476053
sgo.sagepub.com
Introduction
The highly contested U.S. Presidential election between
George H. W. Bush and Al Gore in 2000 turned the televi-
sion network color-coding schemes of red and blue states
into a shorthand system for describing political differences
throughout the United States. In 2000, blue states repre-
sented those states which chose Democratic candidate Al
Gore to become the next president, with red states support-
ing Republican candidate George H. W. Bush. These terms
have continued to be used to describe political attitudes at
both the individual and geographic levels.1
The focus of this article is to investigate how these terms
have come to be used by the press since the 2000 election,
specifically between 2004 and 2007. Although it is clear that
these labels have become part of the political lexicon in
many circles, it is unclear whether they define a political
reality, a media artifact, or are simply a shortcut to describe
political divisiveness. By illustrating how these terms were
used over a 4-year period which included a presidential elec-
tion, it is expected that this article can shed some light on this
topic.
Literature Review
If we are to assume that the media are a persuasive force
which has a tangible effect on political attitudes, then there
is a need to understand how the news media are framing
political discourse. How are writers portraying the nature of
political divisions, and on what topics are politicians
divided? What characterizes "red" voting behaviors and
lifestyles in comparison with those on the "blue" end of the
spectrum? Is America truly divided, or are the divisions
exacerbated by political elites for their own interests? The
media are expected to make sense of these aspects of the
political and social landscape (Gamson, 1992), though it is
an open question as to whether media reporting engages the
power struggles that shape news articles, columns, and com-
mentaries.
A useful, and often used, concept for studying news
reporting is frames. A frame, as defined by George Lakoff
(2004), is a cognitive map which helps viewers to understand
how the information is to be recognized, understood, and
processed. Frames used within media messages are also seen
as a tactic of persuasion, created and maintained largely by
politicians and pundits, mediated and disseminated within
journalism, to get the voting public to think of any given
issue within the language of a particular political campaign
(Luntz, 2007). Moreover, people have a tendency to accept
only facts which fit within the framework of the discussion,
476053
SGOXXX10.1177/2
158244013476053SAGE OpenGross
2013
1St. Bonaventure University, NY, USA
Corresponding Author:
Benjamin Gross, Department of Sociology, St. Bonaventure University,
Plassmann Hall, Room A-4, St. Bonaventure, NY 14778, USA.
Email: bgross@sbu.edu
Color-Coding Politics: Creating Meaning
About "Red States" and "Blue States" in U.S.
Newspapers Between 2003 and 2007
Benjamin Gross1
Abstract
During the 2000 Presidential election between George H.W.Bush andAl Gore,journalists often used the terms blue states and
red states to describe the political landscape within the United States.This article studies the framing of these terms during the
years 2004 through 2007. Using latent and manifest qualitative content analyses, six different news media frames were found
in a sample of 337 newspaper articles.Two hypotheses were also tested indicating that framing patterns varied slightly by time
period and article types. However, the argument that increased levels of political polarization in the United States have been
created by predominantly conflict-oriented coverage may not be true.Instead,these terms became journalistic heuristics that
were used to organize how people think about politics in a way that fit with contemporary media practices, and there is no
single agreed upon interpretation of these terms within this reporting.
Keywords
politics, media frames, media effects
2 SAGE Open XX(X)
as frames are pervasive and critical to political discussion
and thought which structure our ideas and reasoning (Lakoff,
2006; Luntz, 2007). Consequently, frames structure political
debate, and those who are able to create and maintain frames
built about their own assumptions and worldviews will be
able to control political discourse and the ways in which the
general public thinks about issues (Lakoff, 2004).
It is important to note that people are not necessarily
impotent when dealing with frames, even those that have
been found to be highly persuasive. For example, research
has shown that media messages are often less persuasive
when the receiver questions the credibility of the news
source (Petty & Wegener, 1998), or whenever a person
already holds strong and certain attitudes about the topic
being discussed (Patterson, 1980). Still, frames do matter
(Gamson & Modigliani, 1989), and political sources often
try to provide frames--or framing tools--to reports to shape
news stories. Political discourse consists of differing interest
groups and competitors trying to generate interest for their
ideas in the minds of some component of the general popula-
tion or special interest groups (Sunstein, 2009). In a demo-
cratic and media-saturated society (Thompson, 1995), we
expect to find several competing discourses existing simulta-
neously in the marketplace of ideas. Within this field, media
consumers must sift through the overwhelming amount of
content, and find views and assumptions that compliment
their own value sets (Manjoo, 2008). As Gamson and
Modigliani (1989) noted, "On most policy issues, there are
competing packages available . . . one can view policy issues
as, in part, a symbolic contest over which interpretation will
prevail" (p. 2).
Framing should not be confused with public opinion, as
the media are multivalent (Gamson, Croteau, Hoynes, &
Sasson, 1992). Frames are simply the ways in which report-
ing is structured, and frames are used and created by a wide
variety of opinion leaders, professional politicians, news
journalists, and the general American public over time. As
Gamson and Modigliani (1989) added, every policy issue
has a culture, and there is an ongoing discourse that evolves
and changes over time. Political discourse, as well as politi-
cal frames, will change as social circumstances and political
values also change (Gitlin, 1980). Media frames, which can
include visuals, impact the social construction of meaning
about political issues and candidates, and should not be
thought of as inflexible but as relatively fluid (Barrett &
Barrington, 2005).
The motivation behind this study stems from the work of
Morris Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope (2006) in their book
Culture War? The Myth of a Polarized America. The authors
challenge the characterization of an American public that is
bitterly divided on major political issues. Among their find-
ings is a claim that the U.S. public consists predominantly of
ideological moderates who feel ambivalent on most issues,
even on emotionally charged ones such as abortion. While
there is a division among competing political party officials,
the differences for the vast majority of Americans are con-
sidered far from polemic. If anything, Fiorina and colleagues
see most Americans' political views as becoming more simi-
lar to one another. These points are supported by DiMaggio,
Evans, and Bryson (1996) whose research indicates that
most Americans can be located at a stable centrist level, rela-
tively unaffected by the polarization of political elites on
either side. A decade later, Baldassarri and Gelman (2008)
argued that while politicians have taken increasingly extreme
positions over the last few decades, most people have main-
tained a stable and moderate political stance on a wide array
of issues over the same time period.
From this point of view, political polarization is thought
to be a myth. Increasingly, the United States is described as
"purple" at both the individual and geographic level, and the
assertion is made that "at the individual level, most
Americans are ideological moderates rather than extremists,
on both economic and moral issues" (Ansolabehere, Rodden,
& Snyder, 2006, p. 5). Fiorina and colleagues (2006) sup-
ported this argument, claiming that each state actually con-
tains a significant representation of both conservatives and
liberals that can (and do) win elections at all levels of gov-
ernment. Therefore, the color of each U.S. state is not clearly
"red" and "blue" but some shade of purple.
Fiorina et al. (2006) took the media to task for populariz-
ing the idea that the United States is divided among political
camps, stating "the prevailing media frame of a polarized
nation is not an accurate one" (p. 66), citing that the idea of
America being deeply divided is largely a product of the
media. "They [the media] talk primarily to the political class
and each other. This is not representative of what is normal"
(Fiorina et al., 2006, p. 21) and "commentators often present
Sociological factoids as if their electoral implications were
self-evident" (Fiorina et al., 2006, pp. 34-35). Gronbeck and
Wiese (2005) also found the red/blue paradigm to be a media
oversimplification of reality; an overarching story line con-
structed to frame public opinion while on the campaign trail.
The concept of red and blue were terms used in an effort to
commodify the American voter by the reporters and politi-
cians. This was done as an attempt to simplify the voting
public into consumable products whose properties could be
identified, packaged, and transformed by political profes-
sionals. Discussions about the existence of a "culture war"
are believed to be nonsensical, and there seems to be little
evidence that the public is now entrenched within one
(Glaeser & Ward, 2006).
Instead of a cultural war, it seems to be the case that indi-
viduals, whether self-labeled as liberals or conservatives,
tend to hold both conservative and liberal values depending
upon the issue, and that states are not unidirectional in any
sense (Dombrink, 2005; Fiorina et al., 2006). Baldassarri and
Gelman (2008) found that many people neither match nor
align their political stances consistently with any particular
political party and also that voters often change their stances
over time on a variety of issues. In the end, regardless of
Gross 3
their voting patterns, the majority of Americans can be
viewed as experiencing a high degree of ambivalence on
political issues. To categorize and identify entire regions of
the country into colors based on the results of a winner-take-
all presidential election distorts how people really feel or act
within political contexts (Webster, 2007).
Still, there are political scholars who suggest that there is
a growing cultural and political divide in the United States.
Tom Frank (2004) claimed that there has been a transforma-
tion among American voters, who are now placing religious
concerns ahead of economic ones, and he notes a small but
increasing trend in levels of political polarization. Frank has
argued that political stereotypes are being created as indi-
viduals connect their voter preferences to their lifestyle prac-
tices. The "latte liberal" is just one example. This constituent
is a liberal who is positioned above the working class and
holds no empathy for those below him or her. It is implied
that he or she is also snobby, out-of-touch with ordinary peo-
ple and their red-state values, and thinks that others are both
ignorant and mysterious. In creating these kind of defini-
tions, it is clear that one side is being defined as decent and
noble, the other as distant and dispassionate.
There are other researchers who argue that there is evidence
that these divides are real. Abramowitz and Saunders (2005)
contended that political polarization is at an all-time high in the
United States, and is increasing. In addition, Greenberg (2004)
contended that the bulk of theAmerican public is loyal to a spe-
cific party, and only a small number of voters are in a position to
be won over by some political campaign or slogan.Abramowitz
and Saunders also note that there are major sociological differ-
ences between red and blue states, particularly when it comes to
religious services, opinions about abortion, and gun ownership.
These writers believe that the news media are mirroring reality
in their reports, accurately depicting a country suffering from a
deep political divide.
Research Hypotheses and Method
It is predicted here that frameworks rise and fall in popular-
ity over time, and that different types of article writers would
be more or less likely to engage in inflammatory political
rhetoric in their writing. Two specific hypotheses were
developed and stated below.
Hypothesis 1: The prevalence of frameworks varied
over different time period. In particular, newspa-
pers would be more likely to use conflict-oriented
before the 2004 U.S. Presidential election and less
likely afterward.
Hypothesis 2: Frame usage patterns would differ
by type of article writer. Specifically, editorial-
ists would be more likely to use conflict-oriented
frames to discuss the political landscape than would
professional journalists.
To study the ways in which the "red and blue" rhetoric has
been used and framed, a sample of 337 newspaper articles
containing the terms red state and blue state was drawn over
a 4-year time period--2004-2007--using LexisNexis. The
purpose was to understand what kinds of assertions and
assumptions were being made in these articles, what issues
were being defined as important, and how these ideas were
being packaged for interpretation by the readers.
Each newspaper article was coded using a variety of mani-
fest and latent coding schemes. Articles were read by one
researcher and then a random sample of these articles was read
by a second individual who had been trained to use the same
coding scheme. Intercoder reliability was found to be .80,
which is relatively strong. In regards to the manifest codes,
attention was given to the length of the story, the date the story
was published, whether the story appeared on the front page,
what section of the newspaper the article was located, where
the newspaper was located, and whether or not the piece was
editorial or commentary (e.g., George Will and Tom Frank).
These manifest codes did not yield any statistically significant
differences with regards to the framing couched within the
red-and-blue discussions, showing coverage to be remarkably
uniform by geographic location and time.
The articles were also analyzed qualitatively to discover
if there were any recurring themes and portrayals of the U.S.
political landscape that could be captured by latent content
analyses. While reading the articles, attention was given
toward interpreting underlying key meanings and assump-
tions that were being made about U.S. politics. Although
interpretations of article content may vary from one reader to
another, patterns began to emerge and articles clustered
toward common themes and dimensions. The following dis-
cussion is based on these latent analyses.
Qualitative Frameworks:Analysis
and Discussion
Six identifiable frames emerged while coding the articles.
These have been termed Call for Unity, Purple State,
Lifestyle Stereotype, Culture War, Liberal Partisan, and How
to Win. Each frame will be defined below. In addition, I will
develop and apply a conceptual framework for understand-
ing the differences between them.
The Call for Unity frame urged people to put aside their
differences, placing an emphasis on the need to unite the
nation as a top priority for all Americans. Readers were
called upon to stop focusing on what ideas separate them
from each other and concentrate on commonalities. Authors
using these frames suggested that it was important to put an
end to any discussions of a cultural war. These articles are
aimed at generating thoughts about commonalities and a
sense of shared goals among all members of the U.S. public.
Generally, these articles had an overall tone of civility and
unity.
4 SAGE Open XX(X)
These writers implored the readers to think how they are
being misrepresented by those who use more inflammatory
rhetoric when describing the political sphere of the United
States. This framework warns the readers to be on guard
from political opportunists who would try to oversimplify
complex political realities with labels to pursue their own
gains. A telling quote within this framework comes from
Barack Obama in a speech made during the 2004 Democratic
Party convention. This quote succinctly summarizes the
framework.
The pundits like to slice and dice our country into red
and blue states. Red States for Republicans, blue states
for Democrats. But I've got news for them, too. We
worship an awesome God in the blue states, and we
don't like federal agents poking around in our libraries
in the red states. We coach Little League in the blue
states and, yes, we've got some gay friends in the red
states. There are patriots who opposed the war in Iraq,
and there are patriots who supported the war in Iraq.
(DeBose, 2004, Section A, p. 6)
It is important to note that this framework was not used as
often as some of the more conflict-oriented frames. It
appeared 39 times (11.6%) and was most commonly used in
2004 (24 times). The Call for Unity was most often used dur-
ing the 2004 Presidential election with either direct refer-
ences to the above statement from Barack Obama within an
article, or with voices supporting the statement within an
editorial piece within a few days following the Democratic
National Convention.
In a theme similar to the Call for Unity frame, some writ-
ers used a Purple State frame when discussing the American
political landscape. This frame was used to contend that each
U.S. state simultaneously contained a complex mixture of
both red and blue voter pockets, making the discussion of red
or blue "states" both inaccurate and oversimplified. No state
is entirely red or blue--each state is more like a shade of
purple, where differences are much more nuanced than a
simple clash of blue and red opposites. Those using this
framework would agree with Webster (2007) that categoriz-
ing and identifying entire regions of the country with a polit-
ical valence based solely on the results of a winner-take-all
presidential election lacks validity.
Although these writers often did not deny the existence of
divisive partisan politics or polarization, they emphasized
that there is still a great amount of both heterogeneity
(Glaeser & Ward, 2006) and ambivalence (Fiorina et al.,
2006) within cities, counties, individuals, and states across
the United States in terms of political party affiliation.
Similar to the Call for Unity frame, these writers argued that
the current blue/red paradigm created a disconnection from
political reality (Kuttner, 2005). According to Sandler
(2004),
Our nation is not red and blue, but many shades of
purple. Even in the reddest of the red states, Utah,
Kerry picked up 26 percent of the vote. Even in true-
blue New York City, Bush won the support of more
than half a million voters, presumably including for-
mer mayors Rudy Giuliani and Ed Koch. (Section C,
pp. 9-10)
In addition, it was typical for those using this frame to
accuse the experts and the media of perpetuating animosity
among the public. As Raspberry (2004) added,
It has become routine for reporters to look for prototypi-
cal partisans in every fight and tell our stories through
their irreconcilable arguments. It is a tendency that plays
us false more often than we care to admit. We acknowl-
edge from time to time that the red state/blue state para-
digm we use to describe America's almost evenly split
electorate leaves out the voters whom Senator-elect
Barack Obama of Illinois characterized as blue people in
red states and vice versa. The fact that, in all but the two
states that apportion their electoral votes, a scant
Electoral College majority is enough to turn an entire
state red or blue tempts our analyses to these oversimpli-
fied images--even when we know that the states are all
varying shades of purple. (Section A, pp. 6-7)
A common element of purple state articles after the 2004
election was the pessimistic tones regarding the motives of
America's political and media institutions. Readers were
urged to avoid the manipulation of political pundits who had
an invested interest in keeping America divided via an artifi-
cial construction of differences. Accusations were made that
discourse was retarding any meaningful political debates and
distorting people's thoughts and views. These writers would
likely agree with Gronbeck and Wiese (2005) who said that
the creation of the red and blue labels were lazy constructs
maintained by political professionals for the purposes of
commodifying voters through the use of inaccurate stereo-
types. As Landa (2006) added,
I never cared much for the red-state, blue-state politi-
cal composition; I thought it was lazy. When a TV
news personality stood in front of a map and said
"This is a red state and this is a blue state," most of us
watching slumped on the sofa with our brains propped
on the ottoman. It couldn't be that simple, and it
wasn't. (Section A, pp. 7-8)
Claims were made within this frame that the predominant
defining characteristic among the public were feelings of
ambivalence toward politics, not sharp ideological divides
(Baldassarri & Gelman, 2008; DiMaggio et al., 1996; Fiorina
et al., 2006). For example, Kuttner (2005) added that
Gross 5
Polls show that a majority of Americans want to keep
abortion legal, but have serious qualms about its wide-
spread use. As citizens, most Americans want a clean
environment, but as consumers we are addicted to pol-
luting cars. A majority of heterosexual Americans
think the government should stay out of the bedrooms
of gay adults, but still have trouble with gay marriage,
though not necessarily domestic partnerships. Most
Americans believe in God, but most believers are tol-
erant of people of diverse faiths or no faith, and don't
think the government should be in the business of
proselytizing, much less that religion should dictate
science. (Section A, p. 12.)
The Purple State frame appeared 53 times (15.7%) within
this 4-year period. It would appear that this frame was used
mainly by those who either used it to speak of political bat-
tlegrounds during the 2004 election, or by those who wanted
to openly challenge the very emergence of terms such as red
and blue after election year news coverage. Over time, the
meaning systems transformed from an assumption that dif-
ferences between areas were tangible toward claims that
minimal (or no) differences existed whatsoever between
people of various geographic areas.
Nevertheless, writers often focused upon significant lifestyle
patterns and markers which were seen to be the evidence of
major social differences between those who were red-state or
blue-state people. These writers constructed a Lifestyle
Stereotype frame to discuss all varieties of social differences
recognized across the nation between liberals and conserva-
tives. Rarely did this framework talk at all about actual political
issues, candidates, ideologies, or elections. Instead, these writ-
ers reduced the American populous to vague caricatures which
they assumed could be easily witnessed in everyday interac-
tions. Their focus shifted attention toward the more mundane
daily lifestyle patterns of the American voters. One example
comes from Patinkin (2004), who contributed the following:
As you can see, there are already serious red/blue ste-
reotypes.
People in blue states are said to spend their time eating
sushi, wearing Birkenstocks and drinking lattes, extra
foam, biscotti on the side. Those in Red states chew
tobacco, drink Pabst Blue Ribbon and watch NASCAR.
The color labels have recast the stereotypes of each
party.
Once, being Republican meant you cared about law
and order while calling your broker from your Lexus
to ask about your portfolio. Now, Republicans are red-
state people, who are caricatured as driving around in
pick-ups with gun-racks on the back. There are already
serious red/blue stereotypes. (Section D, p. 1)
Even when the writers were not attempting to speak
seriously about actual political issues or promote
political candidates, they consistently assumed that there were
majordifferencesbetweenpeopleintheUnitedStates.However,
these writers never launched any serious investigation about
whether the assumptions regarding "red" or "blue" lifestyles or
personality types were accurate.While seemingly not motivated
by any political ambitions, these articles had a way of painting a
portrait of two Americas that were strongly divided, seeing the
differences as self-evident and unworthy of debate. Readers
were implicitly assumed by the writers to understand that a sig-
nificant difference in cultural values and lifestyle patterns defi-
nitely existed within the United States. While not actively
pursuing any political agenda, writers within this framework
may have exacerbated differences among the population with-
out an intention of doing so. These writers may have even used
humor mixed with these personal stereotypes to call people to
unity, such as was the following from Dave Barry (2004):
Must we stereotype those who disagree with us?
Do we truly believe that ALL red-state residents are
ignorant racist fascist knuckle-dragging NASCAR-
obsessed cousin-marrying roadkill-eating tobacco-
juice-dribbling gun-fondling religious fanatic rednecks;
or that ALL blue-state residents are godless unpatriotic
pierced-nose Volvo-driving France-loving left-wing
communist latte-sucking tofu-chomping holistic-wacko
neurotic vegan weenie perverts? (Section D, p. 10)
Even though this specific piece was openly sarcastic of the
caricatures at the time, stereotypes of conservatives and liberals
were ultimately developed and maintained among these articles
across a wide array of personal beliefs, values, consumer tastes,
and daily practices. Whether intentional or not, these examples
consistently developed vague stereotypes about varied seg-
ments of the U.S. populous. While some other frames down-
played or rejected the notions of significant differences among
the U.S. electorate, the Lifestyle Stereotype frame strived to
illustrate virtually all conceivable ways in which the red and
blue groups differed. It was interesting to note the variety of
ways these articles classified the public in terms of everyday
commodities--tastes in movies, music, literature, coffee, com-
edy, architecture, and other arenas of personal life that most
people would not typically think of in politicized terms.
Overall, the Lifestyle Stereotype frame was found in 45
articles (13.4%). These stories tended to surface slightly
more often after 2004. In some ways, this framework is per-
haps the most interesting because of the ways it was used to
illustrate overlaps between personalities and politics, which
calls into question linkages between structure and agency. It
becomes an open question as to whether we are free to
choose our politicians or that our politicians are given to us
through our lifestyle choices.
While the Lifestyle Stereotype frame often poked fun at dif-
ferentAmerican lifestyles by reifying assumptions behind them,
the Culture War frame made far more serious claims about sub-
stantial political differences. Writers using this frame claimed
6 SAGE Open XX(X)
that there existed a sociopolitical divide so deep that there really
were twoAmericas instead of one.As stated by political pollster
John Zogby in an article by David Cook (2004),
Among those who attend church or a place of worship
at least weekly . . . 52 percent [live in] red states . . .
34 percent in blue states . . . I have to tell you the reli-
gion thing really just sort of blew me away. Frequent
church-goers are dramatically more likely to live in
red states and they vote. When you see the numbers of
Protestants in these red states, you are always looking
at least half of those being born-again--that is sub-
stantial . . . Democrats have to do something about
family values. That is a huge deficit that they have
against Republicans. (Section A, p. 2)
The Culture War frame projected the political left as a
group that was out-of-touch with what people want from
their country and demanded from the government. Writers
often insisted that people in the blue states "just don't get it"
when it came to the importance of religion, in particular.
Conservative writers often pointed out that a shift in the
political landscape had been the product of an enormous cul-
tural shift rooted in conservative Christian moral values, and
those who lived in the blue states were largely not even
aware of this shift. These writers claimed that the blue-state
liberals lost major elections because they failed to recognize
the importance of religion in their political agendas.
These claims were often bolstered by political polling and
the U.S. Census Bureau data, which were often offered as
"sociological proof" that differences between the red and
blue states was both striking and clear. For example, the fol-
lowing was pointed out by Carrubba (2007):
*George Bush carried 14 of the 15 states which
refused to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment (Illinois
was the exception);
*Bush carried all 10 states with the lowest per capita
income, and the 10 states with the lowest percentage
of the population who are college graduates;
*John Kerry carried 9 out of 10 states with the highest
income and educational levels (Colorado was the
exception);
*Bush carried all 20 states that have the highest per-
centage of their populations belonging to Evangelical
Protestant churches.
*Bush carried all 10 states that still allow corporal
punishment in the schools;
*Bush carried 8 of the 10 states with the lowest abortion
rates (except Maine and Vermont); while Kerry carried 8
of the 10 states with the highest abortion rates (except
Nevada and Florida). (Section A, pp. 3-4)
The message and theme within the Culture War frame
was to heed a warning call to all readers: by askingAmericans
to wake up to the regrettable reality of bitter political divi-
sions across the country. In addition, the writers appeared
motivated to claim that the political right should have the
upper hand in the political sphere, as they are the representa-
tives of the "real" America. The Culture War frame urged
readers to think about these differences in values to create
meaning about political issues--to see conservative politics
as "right" and liberal politicians or movements as "incorrect"
or "misguided."
Many using this frame voiced contempt for the values of
the political left while expressing the notion that conserva-
tive politicians were in power because Republicans were the
ones who understood real Americans. These claims were
often controversial and conflict-oriented even though the
writers consistently presented the data as if the divide was
easy to document. Many Culture War articles suggested to
the readers that differences were deep-rooted and that com-
promise was unlikely to be reached in the foreseeable future.
Overall, there was a sense that those refusing to acknowl-
edge this chasm were simply ignoring the facts.
There were 59 articles which asserted the existence of a
culture war (17.5%). These articles were evenly dispersed
between election and nonelection years, suggesting that the
topic was (and continues to be) a central point to numerous
political authors over long periods of time. This fact seems
consistent with the claims made by Fiorina and colleagues
(2006) that there is a political class with a vested interest in
continually portraying the nation as bitterly divided for the
purposes of acquiring political capital.
Meanwhile, the Liberal Partisan frame also argued that
there were two different Americas. Alternatively, however,
leftist writers dominated this framework. In response to frus-
trations stemming from the Bush administration policies and
culture war frames, many liberal pundits fired back, regu-
larly making confrontational statements about conservatives
and their politics. The Liberal Partisan frame was a place
where the animosity Democrats held toward Republicans
became overt and fairly easy to see. Leftist writers would
often revert to using rhetorical language and stinging accusa-
tions to make their points to the readers.
The Liberal Partisan frame featured writers who openly
challenged all notions that conservatives had a monopoly on the
representation of everyday "real Americans." Although writers
using this frame generally agreed with Culture War writers that
Americans were divided along major social and moral issues,
this particular frame was used to express open contempt toward
conservative America and its writers. For example, the follow-
ing article from Arends (2004) claimed that the red states were
financially bilking the blue states, paying them back with scorn,
intolerance, and a lack of gratitude:
Gross 7
The blue states remain the engine of the American
economy. All in all they produced $5.4 trillion in goods
and services in 2001, the last year for which reliable
data is available . . . that's about $700 billion more than
the red states, according to the government's Bureau of
Economic Analysis. (Section C, p. 10)
Political critics from the left openly resented and ques-
tioned conservative claims of patriotism and piety, and
accused the right of hypocrisy concerning moral values.
While the political left was suggested to be "out-of-touch"
and "elitist" by conservatives pundits, liberals accused con-
servatives of warmongering, excessive rates of adultery,
divorce, teenage pregnancy, while being opposed to improve-
ments in education programs and gun control laws.
Nevertheless, writers were not without their own objec-
tives of accumulating political capital while questioning the
moral turpitude of political opponents. Articles suggest that
readers think about how none of the actions pursued by con-
servative politicians were justified on either religious or
political grounds. Readers were supposed to recognize how
Republican policies ran contrary to what people hold as
being "moral," "spiritual," or even "American." These con-
tests took place on most, if not all, major political issues such
as taxation, abortion, the war in Iraq, and so on. Similar to
the Lifestyle Stereotype frame, these battles often overlapped
the personal with the political, although here the arguments
were much more serious and never intended to be humorous.
The hypocrisy of the conservative right is examined in the
following quote from Steinfels (2004):
Are not moral values also at stake in decisions about
war, in drawing lines against torture, in addressing
poverty or in providing desperately needed housing
and health care? It has become commonplace to note
that for every injunction in the Bible regarding homo-
sexuality there are hundreds, maybe thousands regard-
ing care for the poor. (Section A, pp. 5-6)
Overall, the Liberal Partisan frame was the most prevalent
frame in this sample, being used in 89 articles (26.4%). This
frame was particularly popular in the years in which the
Republican Party held both the Presidency and the majority of
U.S. Congressional seats, and began to decrease in popularity
starting in 2007. It is possible that this may have reflected a
reduction of rhetoric, frustration, hostility, and anxiety among
liberal writers and politicians--feelings that may have been
most salient and intense between the years 2004 to 2006.
Finally, the How to Win frame defined was a space where
professional writers and political experts discussed both real
and potential political strategies in attempts to figure out
how a candidate could win an election. Campaigns were
compared with sporting contests, being said to be "executing
strategies" and "scoring points," often utilizing sports meta-
phors to describe U.S. politics as a contest or game. Writers
using this frame liked to subdivide geographical regions by
"figuring out what plays" in any given area, claiming that
successful moves were analogous to "hitting a home run" or
that opponents were "jockeying for position" to describe the
motivations of candidate actions and policy formations.
Moreover, this framework offered an assumption of insin-
cerity in the motives of the politicians to readers. Another
key assumption connoted to the readers was that major social
differences by regions and political parties were indeed fac-
tual and beyond question. These writers generally also
assumed that any politician who did not acknowledge or
address the differences did so at his or her own peril.
Continually, it was suggested that politicians must be
willing to "win the contest" by consistently offering what-
ever words and phrases would "score well" with voters in an
area, regardless of where they genuinely stood on the issue.
Writers within this frame emphasized that professional polit-
ical campaigns should be carefully managed, crafted, and
tailored by candidates depending on audience characteristics
and geographical region to gain a maximized payoff. The
frames were full of advice, predictions, and suggestions from
an assortment of political gurus or social scientists directed
toward the candidates. Similar to a team coach or instructor,
strategies regarding how a candidate should "speak to the
people" in a particular state to get their support were voiced.
It is not hard to imagine how anyone reading these texts
would feel distrust for politics, skepticism about the candi-
dates, and an overall negative feeling toward the election
process.
Writers using this frame attempted to outline precisely
how these two Americas differed in terms of demographics
and their support of specific social-political issues. Data, in
the form of polling statistics or other facts and trends about
the U.S. population were always offered as unquestioned
justification for the writer's suggestions. By recognizing
these differences and appealing to them, a candidate could
win or lose in any given election. One example comes from
Skiba (2004) who used demographic data to support an argu-
ment being made about how John Kerry and George H. W.
Bush should pursue effective campaign strategies:
Red states have smaller percentages of younger voters,
single voters, college graduates, liberals, Catholics
and Jews, union members and non-prayers . . . Blue
states have proportionally fewer Republicans, rural
dwellers, conservatives, born-again Christians, daily
or weekly attendees at a place of worship, local sports
fans, gun owners, investors, military veterans and
married voters. (Section A, p. 4)
Overall, the How to Win frame was the third most preva-
lent news frame in this study, trailing only the Culture War
and Liberal Partisan frames in terms of frequency. However,
half of these appearances were made during the 2004 U.S.
Presidential contest. In total, How to Win was used 52 times
8 SAGE Open XX(X)
(15.4%). It appears that these frameworks decrease signifi-
cantly in the absence of a major political election but are
quite prevalent during election years.
HypothesesTests Using Quantitative
Analysis
To test Hypothesis 1, articles were subdivided into three cat-
egories depending on when the newspaper article was pub-
lished: before the 2004 U.S. Presidential election, between
election night 2004 and the end of the year, and in the 3 years
following the election (2005-2007). The data should not only
show variance in the patterns of framework prevalence, but
the time period leading up to the election should have higher
rates of inflammatory claims being made on the left and right,
or high frequencies of the culture war and liberal partisan
frames. However, that did not seem to be the case.
Table 1 indicates small but significant findings in the rela-
tionship between frameworks used and the time the article was
written (2 = 23.182, p = .01; Cramer's V = .185, p = .01). The
data suggest that seems to be a weak but significant relationship
between frameworks depending on whether the article was
written before the 2004 election, slightly after, or 2005 and
beyond. For example, alternate data analysis conducted showed
that when these time periods were condensed into years (2004,
2005, 2006, and 2007), the findings were not found to be sig-
nificant (2 = 14.858, p = .462; Cramer's V = .121, p = .462).
Based on these results, the data show weak and partial
support for Hypothesis 1, although the more conflict-ori-
ented frameworks did not appear more frequently before the
2004 election. However, it appears that a more appropriate
interpretation of these data would claim that while all six
frames appear within newspapers in a fairly consistent pat-
tern over time, some frames may become slightly more com-
mon than others at any given time period. This is consistent
with Gamson and Modigliani (1989), who pointed out that
frames shift in definition, duration, and frequency of usage
over time in any discourse of political issues.
Table 1. Framework Usage by Time Period
When was article written?
Total

Between 2004 election
and the end of 2004 2005 or later
Before 2004
Election
Frame
 Call for unity
Count 13 15 11 39
Expected count 11.6 19.9 7.5 39.0
 % within when was article written? 13.0 8.7 16.9 11.6
 How to win
Count 7 26 19 52
Expected count 15.4 26.5 10.0 52.0
 % within when was article written? 7.0 15.1 29.2 15.4
 Culture war
Count 19 29 11 59
Expected count 17.5 30.1 11.4 59.0
 % within when was article written? 19.0 16.9 16.9 17.5
 Liberal partisan
Count 29 49 11 89
Expected count 26.4 45.4 17.2 89.0
 % within when was article written? 29.0 28.5 16.9 26.4
 Purple State
Count 19 25 9 53
Expected count 15.7 27.1 10.2 53.0
 % within when was article written? 19.0 14.5 13.8 15.7
 Lifestyle stereotype
Count 13 28 4 45
Expected count 13.4 23.0 8.7 45.0
 % within when was article  written? 13.0 16.3 6.2 13.4
Total
Count 100 172 65 337
 Expected count 100.0 172.0 65.0 337.0
 % within when was article written? 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Gross 9
My second hypothesis required a classification of the
articles where editorials were separated from others. It
seemed plausible that editorial writers (often political pun-
dits or members of the general public) would be more likely
to take a less neutral stance than professional journalists,
hence using more conflict-oriented frames. The results can
be seen in Table 2.
The data show that editorial writers were more likely to
espouse democrat critiques toward the Republican Party.
However, editorials were also less likely to describe the
American political landscape as being immersed in the mid-
dle of a culture war. In addition, these writers were also more
likely to deny the existence of a red/blue dichotomy, as the
purple state frame emerges often. As expected, articles writ-
ten by professional journalists were more likely to adopt how
to win frames to illustrate actual and potential political strat-
egies. The data table also shows that journalists were slightly
more likely to indicate that the United States was in a culture
war. Although these findings did not show a strong
correlation (Cramer's V = .262, p = .000), these figures do
show significance between frame usage and article author
type (2 = 23.186, p = .000).
Again, the data show weak but partial support for
Hypothesis 2, that patterns of news frames vary by type of
author. However, these patterns did not vary in the specific
ways that were predicted. Editorialists were more likely than
journalists to question the existence of red or blue states,
although numerous critiques against the Republican Party
and "red state" politics were voiced also. Journalists, by
comparison, would often assume that political differences by
region were real and could be exploited by politicians. In
addition, these news articles were an avenue to inform the
public more specifically how different groups and areas var-
ied in terms of political values.
Discussion and Conclusion
The news media in the United States have an impact on
society that goes beyond this content analysis of newspaper
articles, though what that impact is goes beyond most stud-
ies. The media are multivalent (e.g., Gamson et al., 1992), as
are its readers. Coverage reflected a wide variety of different
viewpoints over time existing simultaneously at most points
in time. Sweeping general statements regarding the relation-
ship between political partisanship and the U.S. newspaper
media are tenuous at best, and potentially misleading. There
seems to be little evidence of any single dominant frame-
work characterizing all news media coverage of politics.
This suggests that the news media are not directly to blame
for creating rapidly increasing political polarization among
the U.S. public--if such polarization exists.
Perhaps more disconcerting is how news stories often
regard the motives of politicians as potentially sinister or
manipulative; that parties and political elites use sociological
data and polls to manipulate publics by geographical region
to gain their support. Furthermore, it is possible that readers
may develop negative stereotypes of their fellow Americans
based on the development of stereotypical "red state" or
"blue state" behaviors and beliefs. These beliefs may be
capable of breeding a disdain for political different others
among American public and reducing the overall civility
toward one another in U.S. political discourse.
Last, there did not seem to be any dominant pattern or
frame in the coverage which would suggest that political elites
effectively use specific rhetorical devises to uniformly pursue
an agenda that deeply divided the nation. One could make the
argument that political polarization is on the rise in the United
States, but the data presented here did not support the idea that
these cleavages are being driven by excessively conflict-ori-
ented news coverage that ignores all contestations of whether
the United States is really divided. It is imperative that
researchers of the media and politics continue to keep one eye
on the media and the other on the voting public.
Table 2. Framework Usage--EditorialistsVersus Journalists
Editorial?
Total
 No Yes
Frame
 Call for Unity
Count 30 9 39
Expected count 26.4 12.6 39.0
 % within editorial 13.2 8.3 11.6
 How to Win
Count 42 10 52
Expected count 35.2 16.8 52.0
 % within editorial 18.4 9.2 15.4
 Culture War
Count 47 12 59
Expected count 39.9 19.1 59.0
 % within editorial 20.6 11.0 17.5
 Liberal Partisan
Count 47 42 89
Expected count 60.2 28.8 89.0
 % within editorial 20.6 38.5 26.4
 Purple State
Count 29 24 53
Expected count 35.9 17.1 53.0
 % within editorial 12.7 22.0 15.7
 Lifestyle Stereotype
Count 33 12 45
Expected count 30.4 14.6 45.0
 % within editorial 14.5 11.0 13.4
Total
Count 228 109 337
 Expected count 228.0 109.0 337.0
 % within editorial 100.0 100.0 100.0
10 SAGE Open XX(X)
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author received no financial support for the research and/or
authorship of this article.
Note
1. In 1980, the term blue state referred to states that supported the
Republican Party candidate--Ronald Reagan--and red state
denoted the states that voted for the Democratic Party can-
didate--Jimmy Carter. Between 1984 and 2000, color-coding
schemes varied arbitrarily by TV network. Since 2000, the net-
works have maintained a consistent color-coding scheme of
blue for Democrat and red for Republican (Zeller, 2004).
References
Abramowitz, A., & Saunders, K. L. (2005). "Why can't we all just get
along? The reality of a polarized America. The Forum: A Journal
of Applied Research in Contemporary Politics, 3(2), 1-24.
Ansolabehere, S., Rodden, J., & Snyder, J. M., Jr. (2006). Purple
America. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 97-118.
Arends, B. (2004, November 9). Blue states carry U.S. economy, if
not its vote. The Boston Herald, Section C, p. 10.
Baldassarri, D., & Gelman,A. (2008, January 28). Partisans without
constraint: Political polarization and trends in American pub-
lic opinion. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1010098
Barrett, A., & Barrington, L. W. (2005). Newspaper photographs
and voter evaluations of political candidates. Harvard Interna-
tional Journal of Press/Politics, 3, 98-113.
Barry, D. (2004, December 12). "Color our world with red and blue.
The New York Times, Section D, p. 10.
Carrubba, L. A. (2007, July 10). Red states really do differ from
blue states. Staten Island Advance, Section A, pp. 3-4.
Cook, D. T. (2004, January 7). John Zogby and Brad O'Leary. The
Christian Science Monitor, Section A, p. 2.
DeBose, B. (2004, July 28). Obama shines as keynote speaker. The
Washington Times, Section A, p. 6.
DiMaggio, P., Evans, J., & Bryson, B. 1996. Have Americans'
social attitudes become more polarized? American Journal of
Sociology, 102, 690-755.
Dombrink, J. (2005). Red, blue, and purple. Dissent, 52(2), 87-92.
Fiorina M. P., Abrams, S. J., & Pope, J. C. (2006). Culture war? The
myth of a polarized America. New York, NY: Pearson Education.
Frank, T. (2004). What's the matter with Kansas? New York, NY:
Harry Holt.
Gamson, W. A. (1992). Talking politics. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Gamson, W. A., Croteau, D., Hoynes, W., & Sasson, T. (1992).
Media images and the social construction of reality. Annual
Review of Sociology, 18, 373-393.
Gamson, W. A., & Modigliani, A. (1989). Media discourse and
public opinion on nuclear power: A constructionist approach.
American Journal of Sociology, 95, 1-37.
Gitlin, T. (1980). The whole world is watching. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Glaeser, E. L., & Ward, B. A. (2006). Myths and realities of Ameri-
can political geography. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20,
119-144.
Greenberg, S. B. (2004). The two Americas: Our current political
deadlock and how to break it. New York, NY: Thomas Dunne
Books.
Gronbeck, B. L., & Wiese, D. R. (2005). The repersonalization of
presidential campaigning in 2004. American Behavioral Scien-
tist, 49, 520-534.
Kuttner, R. (2005, August 10). Red vs. blue? Not true. The Boston
Globe, Section A, p. 12.
Lakoff, G. (2004). Don't think of an elephant: Know your values
and frame the debate. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green
Publishers.
Lakoff, G. (2006). Thinking points. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss,
and Giroux.
Landa, V. (2006, November 19). Those red, blue voters all over
political map. San Antonio Express-News, Section A, pp. 7-8.
Luntz, F. (2007). Words that work. New York, NY: Hyperion Books.
Manjoo, F. (2008). True enough: Learning to live in a post-fact
society. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Patinkin, M. (2004, December 7). Whether we voted red or blue:
We're all color-coded. The Providence Journal, Section D, p. 1.
Patterson, T. E. (1980). The mass media election: How Americans
choose their president. New York, NY: Praeger.
Petty, R., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Attitude change: Multiple roles
for persuasion variables. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (Vol. 1, 4th ed., pp.
323-390). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Raspberry, W. (2004, November 17). Journalists see things in red
and blue. Herald News, Section A, pp. 6-7.
Sandler, L. (2004, November 14). Not red, not blue. Maybe purple?
Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, Section C, pp. 9-10.
Skiba, K. M. (2004, January 7). U.S. states remain divided. Mil-
waukee Journal-Sentinel, Section A, p. 4.
Steinfels, P. (2004, November 6). Voters say values matter, but it's
important to find out what reality is behind this convenient
catchall. The New York Times, Section A, pp. 5-6.
Sunstein, C. (2009). Going to extremes: How like minds unite and
divide. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, J. B. (1995). Ideology and modern culture. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Webster, G. (2007). The electoral college exacerbates the red-blue
state divide and disenfranchises ethnic minorities. American
Psychologist, 62, 701-703.
Zeller, T. (2004, February 8), Ideas and trends: One state, two state,
red state, blue state. The New York Times, Section B, pp. 9-10.
Bio
Benjamin Gross is an assistant professor of sociology at Saint
Bonaventure University in western New York. His research inter-
ests include political sociology, media sociology, and social
psychology.
