Creative Commons Non Commercial CC-BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) which permits non-commercial use,
reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open
Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
Methodological Innovations
Volume 9: 1­12
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2059799115622767
mio.sagepub.com
Introduction
The zombie may very well be one of the most influential
modern monsters. Besides the pop-cultural hype surrounding
the undead, they increasingly receive the attention of scien-
tists and scholars. There are basically two kinds of zombie
studies. On one hand, the zombie is treated as a cultural
object, and its myths and legends are often seen as represen-
tations of underlying cultural struggles (e.g. Bishop, 2010;
Harper, 2002). The other branch of zombie research is more
scientific in nature and is concerned with using the attack of
the living dead as a metaphor and modeling tool to under-
stand and bring attention to epidemiological processes of
infection as well as global disasters (e.g. Brooks, 2003;
Engler, 2012; Stanley, 2012). Clearly, most of this research is
trying to provide a humorous access to otherwise difficult
topics, which this article tries to emulate. Despite this, the
body of research in this area has grown over the recent years.
Zombies are easy to model and easy to understand, so they
can be used to effectively demonstrate techniques and soft-
ware solutions (Crossley and Amos, 2011; Gelman, 2010;
Munz et al., 2009; Smith, 2014). This is especially true for
simulation models who try to understand and predict the
spread of infectious diseases, which is where our model of
the zombie apocalypse comes in.
While we somewhat build on the use of zombies as a gen-
eral metaphor for disease and infection, we do believe that
this metaphor deserves to be taken more seriously. As it
stands, zombies are reduced to a simple infection and the
zombie apocalypse is just a pandemic. Yet, everyone who
has ever seen a movie about the hungry dead, read a book
about them, or has in any other way been introduced to the
zombie myth should have noted two things. First, the story is
seldom about the zombies, but more or less about how
humans react to this threat. Or, as George A. Romero put it
once, "my stories are about humans and how they react, or
fail to react, or react stupidly. I'm pointing the finger at us,
not at the zombies" (Spitznagel, 2010). Second, the zombie
apocalypse is at its most fundamental a story about the break-
ing down of civilization. There is no modern1 zombie story
that does not in some way or other show the decay and ruin
of society. Often it is even played out twice, once as the gen-
eral setting of the story and again as the destruction of social
bonds is mirrored in the group of survivors, who so often
turn on each other as the zombies close in on them.
From a sociological viewpoint, the topos of the zombie
apocalypse implies several moments that are of utmost
importance in describing and analyzing society at large.
ZombieApocalypse: Modeling the social
dynamics of infection and rejection
Jan R Riebling1 and Andreas Schmitz2
Abstract
In this article, we propose a model that we call ZombieApocalypse and that relies on agent-based simulation on a dynamic
network topology. We simulate three strategies common to the zombie mythology and the sociology of figurational dynamics
by Norbert Elias: cutting ties, being sentimental, and stigmatization. The simulation results are analyzed on two dimensions:
the outcome for the populations of zombies and humans as well as the resulting changes in topology. We show that the
introduction of social dynamics into these models leads to unexpected outcomes. Implications for more "serious" research
on general models of infection and social dynamics are discussed.
Keywords
Infectious diseases, simulation, social networks, figurational dynamics, zombies
1Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg, Bamberg, Germany
2Department of Sociology, Institute for Political Science and Sociology,
University of Bonn, Germany
Corresponding author:
Jan R Riebling, Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg, Feldkirchenstr. 21,
96052 Bamberg, Germany.
Email: jan.riebling@uni-bamberg.de
622767
MIO0010.1177/2059799115622767Methodological InnovationsRiebling and Schmitz
research-article2016
Original Article
2 Methodological Innovations
Zombie lore focuses on the interrelations between social
classes and groups (zombies and humans) as well as on the
ones between different groups of humans. These interrela-
tions involve power struggles in both a material (food, shel-
ter, weapons) and a symbolic sense (trustworthiness,
comradeship). As a consequence of these struggles, the inter-
nal organizations of the groups are also recurrent elements of
the zombie myth, sometimes ending in either a democratic or
an autocratic structuration of the survivors. Likewise, struc-
tural conditions defining the position of actors are assessed
based on their effects on psyche and morale. Additionally,
the processes character of the zombie apocalypse, starting
from the first infection and ending in the (near) decline of
mankind, is also a prominent aspect of sociological research.
We believe that the fundamental lesson we can learn from
the zombie apocalypse pertains to the importance of social
dynamics and social configurations in modeling the spread
of infectious diseases. A quite suitable sociological theory
for this purpose is the process theory of Norbert Elias. This
approach seems to be especially appropriate for our purposes
as figurational sociology consists in: (a) modeling relations
of actors and groups; (b) their temporal dynamics; (c) the
interplay between objective structure and the mental dimen-
sion; (d) the relational operationalization of such figurational
structures; and (e) the abstract reflection about figurations
applying "game models." Usually, however, Elias is used as
a "qualitative" sociologist. In this article, we will show how
to utilize network and simulation techniques in order to oper-
ationalize the relational logic of Elias' approach.
The figurational model we propose and demonstrate on
the following pages tries to incorporate both these lines of
thinking. We call it ZombieApocalypse.2 It follows the
standard model of a zombie infection, wherein the infec-
tion spreads rapidly among the human population convert-
ing them to zombies in the process. To introduce social
parameters and dynamics to the mix, we use networks as
the topology and allow our human agents to act on and
change this topology. This is inspired by Norbert Elias'
notion of the fundamental role that formation and destruc-
tion of social relationships play in the interaction of social
groups. Three different strategies are simulated, which are
inspired by the zombie mythology. In our "escape" sce-
nario, the human players are given the ability to defend
themselves by cutting their ties to zombified players. We
then test a "sentimentality" scenario in which the ability to
cut your ties is dependent on the time this tie existed,
meaning it becomes harder to let go of old friends even
when they become rampaging, undead monsters. This is in
stark contrast to our final scenario of "stigmatization,"
which allows human players to cut their ties to other
humans dependent on the number of zombies the other
human has connection to.
For the simulation, we used the Python programming lan-
guage.3 We were able to build upon and use some excellent
packages, which provided us with all the necessary tools for
running and analyzing the simulation. Most prominently, we
used Simpy's4 framework for the agent-based simulation,
while the NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008) module provided
us with tools for the generation and maintenance of the net-
work graphs. The combination of those two packages was
made easy by the nxsim5 project, which already provides a
basic template for this task. It is a happy coincidence that the
nxsim documentation also uses a zombie infection scenario
as an example. Again, this underlines the apparent usefulness
of the zombie model for didactic purposes.
The social dead
Munz et al.'s (2009) seminal paper on the mathematical
modeling of a zombie infection introduced the hungry
undead to the world of academia. Judging from the number
of publications and the research effort (e.g. Beeton et al.,
2014; Hébert-Dufresne et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2013) on
this subject, the study of zombies is not only taking place
but is gaining attention among researchers interested in the
mathematical models and simulations. The book
Mathematical Modelling of Zombies, edited by Robert
Smith (2014), shows not only the wide variety and the com-
plexity of the mathematical models used to understand a
fictional subject, it also highlights the usefulness of such an
endeavor. Beyond its didactic value and the obvious "hip-
ness" of the topic, there are more serious reasons for con-
sidering the zombie apocalypse as an interesting model for
the spread of infections and diseases. First, it is a very sim-
ple model, which most people have at least a passing famil-
iarity with. Second, it lends itself to speculative thinking,
thereby opening up the view on interesting new lines of
inquiry. Furthermore, because of its social nature, the zom-
bie apocalypse highlights some interesting scenarios that so
far and to our knowledge have been neglected in current
models.
The simplicity of the zombie model stems from the fact
that it ignores a large set of factors that are important in
actual epidemics, for example, incubation time, chances of
remission, how long a carrier is still infectious although he
shows no outward signs, and the mode of infection, just to
name a few. While there are some differences in zombie lore
on the progression of the virus, in general it is a fairly simple
scenario. You either get bitten and turn into a zombie or you
are eaten alive. There is no cure and no noteworthy period of
incubation. Most characters realize pretty fast that they have
been bitten, although they might try to hide that fact from
their companions. This again emphasizes the inherent social
element in the zombie model.
Neglecting lots of details that are present in actual epi-
demics is not necessarily a bad thing. Simplicity is an
important resource in simulation studies. Since we mostly
do simulations to understand processes that are either too
complex or too convoluted, it is beneficial to reduce the
underlying assumptions as much as possible. After a
Riebling and Schmitz 3
fundamental understanding is reached, one can gradually
increase the complexity of the model by adding new inter-
actions, rules, or changing the environmental parameters. If
we were to start out with the complete model, not much
could be learned because the interaction between the
parameters could not be reconstructed from the outcome of
the simulation. Even simple rules can breed complexity,
which makes it impossible to formally predict the outcome.
This follows on from the so-called halting problem, which
is a fundamental rule of the studies of algorithms. It essen-
tially tells us that there is no way to predict the outcome of
a Turing-complete system except by letting it run its
course.6 The fact that very simple rules can actually lead to
such complex systems has been shown in John Conway's
famous "Game of Life" (Gardner, 1970).
The second reason for using zombies as a metaphor has
already been mentioned, namely, the general social character
of the zombie mythos. Zombies in general do not possess any
agency, nor do they have any discernible kind of social coor-
dination or a society of any sort. They are more or less anti-
social automata with little to no intelligence. One could
argue that there is no plausible scenario in which a handful of
zombies could pose a viable threat to human society. In fact,
humanity has a history of ruthlessly dispatching species who
contended with us for domination. Although many of these
contenders were superior in terms of physical strength or
aggression, they were no match against the ingenuity and
social coordination of Homo sapiens. There are a couple of
zombie stories that go into a similar direction by showing
rather realistically how humans would deal with zombies,
either by killing them for sports (e.g. "Zombieland") or by
using them as cheap labor (e.g. "Fido"). This could be the
reason why zombie lore has almost no stories about the fight
between humans and zombies leading up to the destruction
of mankind. Instead, most take place in a world where a
group of humans are already vastly outnumbered by a horde
of zombies. In these scenarios, the microcosm of the social
relations among the group members becomes intensified
against the anti-social background of the undead masses.
Zombie stories often use this for social commentary and to
show the drama of small-group relations.
While the interaction between anti-social zombies and the
social dynamics of the group sometimes only hints at the
social nature of the zombie myth, the setting of the zombie
apocalypse shows this more clearly. The terror of the zombie
apocalypse does not stem from the fact that one is hunted by
a supernatural enemy but rather from the utter destruction of
civilization. Even if you could run away, what would be the
point? What worth does human life hold, without human
society? This point is even made clearer by the constant kill-
ing of zombies who look like humans. In "The Walking
Dead" Issue 24 (Kirkman and Steward, 2015), Rick Grimes,
one of the main characters, comments on this by coming to
the realization that after they have broken all laws of human-
ity and killing zombies has become part of everyday life, the
group of survivors and not the zombies have become the
actual "walking dead."
Social dynamics of a zombie apocalypse
Elias' concept of "figuration" addresses the relational and
processual characters of social reality, focusing on the "nature
of the actors'interdependence" and not on "independent char-
acteristics of their members" (Elias and Scotson, 1993: 27;
authors' translation). This approach emphasizes the relational
and processual character of societal power struggles and
interrelations between social classes within a common figura-
tion. Figurations are conceptualized as "interaction chains"
(Elias et al., 1998), and societies at large are then described by
the relative density and length of those chains, structural con-
ditions which correspond to individual agency, and mental
schemes of the actors involved. Figurational structures inter-
relate with open and closed valencies on the side of the human
actors, that is, the affective orientations toward other actors,
which may or may not be satisfied. These affective interde-
pendencies are central for the operation of societies and indi-
cators for particular societal conditions.
The figurational perspective was made fruitful in his book
with co-author John L. Scotson, Established and Outsiders
(1993), where the relations between already established and
new residents of a small English town have been analyzed.
Elias highlighted the figurational dynamics between the two
groups and described a strong integration within the estab-
lished and a weak integration of the outsiders. A core theo-
retical and methodological aspect of Elias work is "game
models" which are "simplifying intellectual experiments,"
abstracting from empirical contingencies, and which enable
to bring out "more graphically the processual character of
relationships between interdependent people" (Elias et al.,
1998: 121). Game models allow analyzing relationship struc-
tures and power differentials in an abstract way and under
different constraints. They make clear in what way the inter-
dependences of actors change, if the distribution of power is
changed (Elias et al., 1998: 121) The most simple game
model consists of two actors, A and B, and the analysis of
their power relation, whereas the most complex models ana-
lyze complex figuration with many actors on different soci-
etal levels. While Elias (1978) himself utilized game models
in analytical ways, only he was very aware of the further
potential and restrictions of his work: "If sociology has to
investigate figurational processes resembling complex
games, then statistical aids must be developed which will be
suited to this task" (p. 132).
Most of Elias'work, however, consisted of qualitative and
historical methods (cp. Baur and Ernst, 2011), such as study-
ing the dynamics of manners. Whereas most modern propo-
nents of this sociological tradition apply similar methods (cp
X), some also discuss the objective dimension of figurations.
Baur and Ernst (2011: 132) postulate the collection and anal-
ysis of "network analysis" and "process-generated data" in
4 Methodological Innovations
order to empirically reconstruct the "sociogenesis of figura-
tions." Whereas this methodological approach is promising
per se, a challenge for a methodology of figurational pro-
cesses is given as longitudinal network data are rarely extant.
Here, the tool box of social sciences offers another way for
deriving a straightforward methodology. The application of
"game models" explicitly implies the contrafactual variation
of starting conditions and thus less require the analysis of
actual networks or longitudinal data, but rather the potential
to abstract from empirical contingencies and to explicitly
model figurational dynamics by changing the initial condi-
tions and the parameters of figurational mechanisms.
In the next chapter, we propose the use of simulations as
they offer the systematic depiction of various apocalyptic
scenarios ("game models") and play through modifications
under central figurative parameters. This approach enables
an objectification of the relational structure between and
within the groups while taking the inherent process character
into account. In doing so, figurational sociology analyzes
"action chains," that is, the structure and length of interde-
pendences between (groups of) social actors. Applying this
view on the relations between "infected and outsiders," we
find that at t0
, the group of not (yet) infected people can be
treated as the established group, with a high degree of inter-
nal integration in relation to the zombie group.
The central, theoretical focus on figurations as relational
structures implies the use of (a) network graphs and (b)
abstract game models as an adequate model for these kinds
of processes. In the zombie myth, there is nothing to suggest
networks as a topology for the infectious process. In fact, a
Euclidean space would be much more fitting with the pop-
cultural depiction of the zombies interacting with humans.
Biting people is an action which clearly represents a function
of bodily proximity. Our decision to use network graphs as
an environment for the zombie apocalypse, therefore, stems
not so much from the zombie model but from the wish to
explore the effects of the social dynamics, that is, figuration,
in a game model of infection. It has been shown that it is
feasible to use networks as model for established-outsider
figurations (Fuhse, 2012), even if it does not capture the
entirety of the concept.
In the social setting of the zombie apocalypse, there are a
lot of stereotypical plots and subplots (i.e. tropes),7 for exam-
ple, the "humans are the real monsters" message prominently
featured in many zombie stories. From the vast range of
available tropes, for the time being we will consider only
three as candidates for our ZombieApocalypse model:
Escape, Sentimentality, and Stigmatization. In doing so, the
proposed analytical case may well be understood as a "multi-
person game" (Elias et al., 1998: 123 ff.), with different
human groups and isolated zombie actors, who appear in the
form of a horde.
The baseline model of a zombie apocalypse has the human
protagonists fleeing from the undead menace. We call this sce-
nario Escape. Other zombie models sometimes add a "fighting
back" strategy (e.g. Munz et al., 2009), which has the humans
taking the fight to the zombies. In zombie lore, this seems to
be almost never a sensible strategy because in a full-blown
zombie apocalypse, the survivors are always completely out-
numbered. Under these circumstances, attacking zombies
results either in an untimely demise or zombification. In keep-
ing with this perspective, we decided to model the zombie
apocalypse as a threat against which there exists no strategy
except flight or quarantine procedures, for example, a disease
which has a very high lethality and against which there are no
countermeasures. In this respect, our Escape scenario resem-
bles the "flight rule" of the zombie invasion model proposed
by Hébert-Dufresne et al. (2014) minus the reconfiguration of
the survivors--a step we chose to forego in favor of the fol-
lowing scenarios. In Elias' terms, the Escape scenario repre-
sents a simple game model, with isolated human and undead
actors and no organizational complexity.
The second scenario is called Sentimentality and builds on
the common zombie trope of having to kill a loved one or
member of the group because they have been bitten and are
about to turn. Failure to do so in a timely fashion always
results in the death of the human protagonist. It is one of the
central themes of the zombie apocalypse to connect humani-
ty's downfall to our moral choices. In the fallen society of a
zombie apocalypse, compassion is weighed against survival.
In this scenario, the Escape strategy is made less likely by the
emotionalbondbetweenahumanandazombie.Consequently,
this game model includes the figurational mechanism of
valencies, that is, affective bindings between actors.
In the third scenario, which is called Stigmatization, we
try to capture the theme of "leaving the dead weight behind."
Among the many morally disturbing questions protagonists
in a zombie apocalypse have to face, this is the one that most
clearly shows the eroding of morality in a post-zombie soci-
ety. Essentially, this trope consists of leaving a person or a
group of persons behind because they are clearly marked as
"zombie snack" from the beginning and would only serve to
slow the others down. In some ways, this can be thought of
as the corollary to the Sentimentality scenario. Albeit in a
more pre-emptive sense, because, under the assumption of
the Stigmatization strategy, people who are the most vulner-
able to attack are left behind. The cohesion of figurations
also means that the attributes lead individual members to be
extended to others. This stigmatization process operates via
the attribution of problematic properties on the basis of group
membership rather than the consideration of the respective
person. It is thus a more complex game model, which con-
ceptualizes the change of affective valencies as a result of a
change in the figurational power structure.
The rules of ZombieApocalypse
As already mentioned, the general setup follows an agent-
based modeling approach of the particular human­zombie
figuration. More concretely, we defined two types of agents
Riebling and Schmitz 5
(humans and zombies) who differ in the strategies they employ.
We then populated a network environment with those agents
and let them interact. This approach has some aspects of an
evolutionary game dependent on the spatial arrangement of
the agents (Eshel et al., 1998; Jun and Sethi, 2007) because the
game revolves around the competition between different pop-
ulations, whose interactions are constrained by the topology of
the figuration. Yet, there is no evolutionary "learning" of dif-
ferent strategies because we explore only one strategy for the
human population in any given scenario.
The use of networks as a topology for the simulation of
social dynamics has become an integral part of social net-
work analysis. Much of the research trying to connect social
network analysis with agent-based modeling is done with a
specific focus on public health and the containment of pan-
demics (for an overview, see Luke and Stamatakis, 2012:
5ff). Other models, while not always considering social net-
works directly, have used agent-based simulations to intro-
duce social dynamics into models of epidemics (Epstein,
2009; Epstein et al., 2008). Most of these simulation studies
are based on highly standardized models named after the
different states an agent can be in, such as Susceptible/
Infected (SI) or Susceptible/Exposed/Infected/Recovery
(SEIR) (Murray, 2002: 319ff). The baseline model for the
ZombieApocalypse can be considered an SI model since
there are only two possible states our agents can exist in
(Human or flesh-eating Undead). The reason for this is our
focus on the social dynamics rather than on the development
stages of actual diseases. As stated before, the zombie myth
is not interesting in terms of its consistency with epidemio-
logical facts, of which there are barely any. Stories about the
zombie apocalypse are social dramas, not biological ones.
Different graph generators were considered as topologies,
most notably Erdös­Rényi Graphs (Erdös and Rényi, 1960)
and Small World Graphs (Watts and Strogatz, 1998). In the
end, we decided to use scale-free graphs (Barabási and
Albert, 1999), which are essentially small-world networks
with the additional constraint of preferential attachment. In
essence, this creates a network of dense clusters of nodes
connected by central hubs. This structure seemed sensible
for the model of the zombie apocalypse. Since the scale-free
model is known for the resilience of the resulting network
(Cohen et al., 2000) and we are especially interested in the
breakdown of such social structures, this seemed like a natu-
ral choice. In addition, preliminary tests showed not much
difference between classic Small World and scale-free mod-
els in the general outcome. Because our research focus here
is on the social dynamics rather than on the effects of net-
work topologies and because there is already extensive
research (Hufnagel et al., 2004; Newman, 2002; Pastor-
Satorras and Vespignani, 2001) done on the latter, we did not
pursue this line of inquiry any further.
In accordance with zombie lore, we only gave human
agents "real" agency, in the sense that they would be able to
react to the zombie threat and to manipulate the social
topology. The zombies, on the other hand, only serve as a
source of infection. We used the object-oriented program-
ming technique of inheritance and started out with the tem-
plate of a simple network agent whose only "strategy" was to
check for an infection. In this scenario, every human agent
looks at every zombie neighbor in the network topology,
meaning every zombie to which this agent has a geodesic
distance of 1. He then checks for an infection by comparing
a random number between 0 and 1 to the globally defined
probability of getting infected Pinf
. If the random number is
below Pinf
, the human agent is turned into a zombie, which
will then also be a source of infection for the remaining
humans. As long as the network is connected and given
enough rounds of the simulation, the human population will
always go extinct in this scenario. Therefore, this model only
serves as a baseline to compare it to other strategies and to
understand the basic properties of the game. On top of this
basic model, we implemented our three scenarios: Escape,
Sentimentality, and Stigmatization. Each is characterized by
different strategies given to the human agents in this model.
The Escape scenario introduces the possibility of running
away from the zombies by removing the connections (edges)
that connect a human agent to a zombie. During each round
of the simulation, a human agent makes a test against a glob-
ally defined probability Prun
to run away for each connection
he has toward a zombie. In the case of success, this specific
edge between the zombie and the human agent is removed
from the global topology. After this check is made, the game
continues by testing for infections from remaining zombies
connected to that agent as per the rules of the Simple scenario.
That means after the tie to a zombie agent is cut, this specific
zombie no longer plays a role in the test for infection.
Under the Sentimentality scenario, the probability Prun
is
reduced by a sentimentality coefficient. This coefficient is
the product of a globally defined sentimentality Psent
times
the number of ticks t two agents u and v have been con-
nected by an edge in the global topology tu v
,
. The probability
of removing a tie between a human agent and a zombie is
given by the following equation
P P P t
run sent run sent u v
, ,
.
= -( )
The Stigmatization strategy works in a very similar man-
ner as the Escape strategy, but enhances the "foresight" of
the human agents. Every turn, after checking against Prun
and before they check for infection, the agents are looking at
all their human neighbors and count the number of zombies
that are directly connected to those humans. From the com-
bination of the number of the human neighbors' zombie
neighbors nz nbr
,
and the globally defined stigmatization fac-
tor Pstigma
, the probability to pre-emptively cut the ties to the
human neighbor Prun stigma
,
is calculated according to this
equation
P P n
run sigma stigma z nbr
, ,
.
=
6 Methodological Innovations
During the entire run of the ZombieApocalypse, the states
of the network agents as well as the global topology were
logged.
Living in the ZombieApocalypse
Some parameters were kept constant during all simulation
runs. The population was set to 1000 agents, which resulted
in a network graph consisting of 1000 nodes. One of those
nodes was then randomly selected to be "Patient Zero."
Each complete game of ZombieApocalypse was restricted
to 28 rounds to be as consistent with zombie lore as possible
and also because all simulations reached their equilibrium
withinthistimespan.EachscenariooftheZombieApocalypse
was run a thousand times to bring out the general tendencies
of the population dynamics. Therefore, in the following fig-
ures, the lines denote the mean values across all simulations,
while the transparent areas show the minimum and maxi-
mum values.
Since the Simple scenario offers its human agents no way
of escape, it is only a question of time until the human popu-
lation is entirely consumed by zombies (Figure 1). Even a
relatively small chance for infection will result in a steep rise
of infections during the first few rounds of the simulation. In
other models of the zombie apocalypse, especially in the
Munz et al. (2009) model based on ordinary differential
equations, we see a sigmoid or logistic curve instead. The
reason for this difference lies in the topology of a scale-free
network. No matter where the zombie starts out, he is never
too far from a hub that will eventually connect him to other
clusters of nodes. This results in the exponential rise of infec-
tions early on. It also emphasizes the role the topology plays
in our simulation. In the Munz et al. model, the infection is
only dependent on the number of zombies already in the
game, while in the ZombieApocalypse, it is much more
dependent on the number of human nodes within reach of the
zombies. These findings concur with other network-based
zombie simulations (Hébert-Dufresne et al., 2014: 157ff).
From a theoretical standpoint, it is important to note that this
model contains only the objective dimension of the figura-
tion. The subjective elements, like agency, strategy, or reac-
tions, are extant. Therefore, the Simple model cannot be
considered as a figuration in the actual sense.
In the Escape scenario, we give the human agents a chance
to defend themselves by manipulating the network topology.
The resulting model (Figure 2) shows the impact this strat-
egy has, although the probability of cutting one's tie to a
zombie is relatively low ( Prun
= 0 05
. ). On average, the
human population is not so easily overcome as was the case
in the Simple scenario. The zombie hordes take longer to
overtake the human population and are not successful in
reaching all of the humans. Even in the case of the maximum
spread of the zombie infection, there always remain human
nodes, which are disconnected from the zombified network
and can therefore not become infected. In contrast to the
Simple model, the Escape scenario contains individual strat-
egies but no social strategies. Theoretically speaking, this
scenario may be understood as a complete figurative de-dif-
ferentiation and a contraction of "action chains" to the degree
of one (Elias, 1939: 373; author's translation).
Figure 1. Simple ZombieApocalypse populations.
Riebling and Schmitz 7
The minimal values give the best-case scenario wherein
the zombie node itself gets isolated very early on, as is shown
by the colored areas touching the bottom and the top of
Figure 2. This emphasizes the overall effectiveness of an
early quarantine strategy in a network topology. However,
the isolation of nodes from the network only works if the
zombies are isolated in the very early stages of the simula-
tion. Otherwise, the high connectedness and relative robust-
ness of the scale-free graph become its weaknesses as there
are many alternative routes the infection can take.
Introducing our Sentimentality strategy makes the
decompartmentalization of the network even harder. For
this scenario, the probability for sentimentality was set to
0.01, meaning that in every round the probability of run-
ning was reduced by this amount. As a result, the Escape
strategy only exists for five rounds, after which the game
reverts to a Simple ZombieApocalypse. Under these rules,
we see on average a steeper curve than was the case in the
Escape scenario (Figure 3). Another difference to the
Escape scenario is the resulting population maxima. In the
Escape scenario, there were always some isolated nodes
safe from the zombies. This outcome is no longer insured in
the Sentimentality scenario. Only the human agents that
were disconnected in the beginning of the simulation sur-
vived the Sentimentality game. This result reinforces the
notion that timing becomes more essential with a growing
robustness of the figurational network. We ran the simula-
tion with differing probabilities for sentimentality and
defection but always found the same tendencies as pre-
dicted by our assumption that Sentimentality is not a very
sensible strategy in a world overrun by the hungry undead.
Here, the zombie apocalypse appears as a moderated figu-
rative de-differentiation with a contraction of "action
chains" leading to sup-populations.
In our third model, we take a look at the strategy of
Stigmatization as a way of pre-emptively cutting network
ties to human agents who are in danger of becoming zom-
bies. For Figure 4, we set the stigmatization probability
P
stigma to 0.02, while keeping most of the parameters from
the previous models. However, Sentimentality was excluded
from this particular simulation run. Additional simulations
showed that Sentimentality basically had the same effect
when introduced to a Stigmatization scenario. It lowered the
probability to a point where the game reverted to a Simple
ZombieApocalypse and the humans were basically lost.
Because of this, the net effect of the Stigmatization strategy
could not be analyzed properly. Therefore, we decided not
to include Sentimentality in this specific scenario.
Figure 4 shows populations that deviate from the power-
law distributions of the other scenarios and are closer in
shape to the sigmoid curves found in the standard zombie
model that does not rely on a network topology. The
Stigmatization strategy seems to be able to significantly slow
down the zombie apocalypse while being about as effective
in containing the outbreak as the Escape strategy. Also, the
infection tends to spread out at different speeds in separate
runs of the simulation. In Figure 4, we see this in the form of
small, stepwise jumps in the population development. This
seems to point to the special importance of the hubs in the
Stigmatization scenario. The zombie agents spread relatively
Figure 2. Escape ZombieApocalypse populations.
8 Methodological Innovations
fast in the densely connected clusters, but, because of the
stigmatization strategy, these clusters are starting to fall apart
and to disconnect. The hubs, on the other hand, tend to have
many connections to nodes in different clusters. While they
will terminate some of them, because of the zombie
onslaught, this will always never be enough to keep them
from getting infected eventually. The infection then spreads
rapidly to the clusters connected to the hub. Therefore, one
can conclude that in this game, the starting position of the
zombies is more important than in the other scenarios.
This also leads to perhaps the strangest effect of the
Stigmatization scenario. While it was common in the Escape
Figure 4. Stigmatization ZombieApocalypse with Pinf
= 0 3
. , Prun
= 0.05, and Pstigma
= 0.02.
Figure 3. Sentimentality versus Escape ZombieApocalypse populations.
Riebling and Schmitz 9
scenario that in some of the simulation runs zombies were
isolated early on and did not manage to spread far beyond
their initial starting points, this is no longer the case in the
Sentimentality game. Although the general probability to run
still exists, games where the zombies are isolated early on are
consistently fewer than they were under the pure Escape
ZombieApocalypse. Somehow the Stigmatization strategy
slows the infection down but, at the same time, lessens the
impact of the quarantine. On average, there may be not that
much difference, but the best-case scenario (i.e. early con-
tainment) is much less likely in a Stigmatization game.
To understand this effect, one has to look at two different
starting positions for Patient Zero. When the first zombie
starts out as a hub, the game becomes an Escape scenario very
fast, but early containment is also highly unlikely, meaning
big parts of the population will always be lost to the infection.
The second case is more interesting. Here, the zombie starts
out in a densely connected cluster. The infection spreads
through this cluster, while at the same time the connections in
the cluster are reduced as stigmatization becomes more likely
with the increasing number of zombies in the cluster. Because
the hubs are more strongly connected to the clusters, the paths
from every zombie to the hubs are lengthened, which leads to
the aforementioned slowing down of the infection. But it also
has the important consequence of making it more likely for
the infection to eventually reach a hub and spread across the
network. As the Stigmatization reduces the connections
within the cluster, all remaining paths become more likely to
be at some point connected to a hub. Since the infection is
effectively a random walk, it is only a matter of time before a
hub is reached and humanity is doomed.
The Stigmatization model represents a figuration where
small autonomous human groups with less complex action
chains between the survivor groups emerge, resulting in less
concerted and effective anti-zombie practices and finally in a
higher risk of infection for the overall network. As an unin-
tended consequence of the stigmatization by humans, the
power relations between infected and human actors change
to the disadvantage of the latter.
This interpretation of the hidden dangers of the
Stigmatization strategy is further enhanced as we turn our
attention to the changes in the topology resulting from the
ZombieApocalypse. We looked mainly at two indicators: the
percentage of edges retained in the graph after the zombie
rampage had subsided and the remaining "friends" the survi-
vors had on average. Friends, in this instance, refers to the
number of human agents connected to a human agent. In
Table 1, we give an overview of the three scenarios which
allowed for changes in the topology.
One can see that the Stigmatization strategy leads to the
biggest loss in edges for the graph. But it also results in small
groups instead of lone survivors. Sentimentality, on the other
hand, retains most of the original topology, albeit populated
mostly by zombies. In this sense, the Stigmatization scenario
comes very close to the zombie myths. It leads to small
groups of survivors, whose inability to work together makes
society as a whole more vulnerable to the spread of infection.
On one hand, this strategy is effective as zombies will find
less human food, but on the other hand, the infected society
transforms into a figurational structure of small human
groups, giving space for the decline of human solidarity on
the macro-level and ongoing competition for survival. Both
effects seem to arise systematically from the combination of
a scale-free network topology and the Stigmatization strat-
egy. This means they are a structural outcome, which cannot
be reduced solely to the intentions of the agents but rather to
the figurational structure of the model.
Looking at network clustering measures, we find that the
Stigmatization strategy really seems to change the network
in a way that makes it more susceptible to infectious pro-
cesses. Figure 5 gives the average transitivity for all three
scenarios. Transitivity describes the average clustering in a
graph by comparing the number of closed triangles to triads
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994: 165). The sporadic bumps in
transitivity can only be observed in the case of the
Stigmatization scenario. This reinforces the idea that the net-
work decompartmentalizes in a way that increases the group-
ing of the remaining nodes at least temporarily. Furthermore,
this effect seems to be centered on the hubs of the network
since the average network clustering coefficient (Watts and
Strogatz, 1998) for our three scenarios behaves directly
opposite to the transitivity of the graphs. Since transitivity
gives more weight to nodes with larger degrees and the net-
work clustering coefficient tends to favor nodes with rela-
tively fewer degrees, the sporadic clustering seems to be an
effect centered on the hubs of the network.
Similar to the classical analysis of Elias and Scotson, it
turned out that the structural conditions of the group relations
are important factors for the development of society in gen-
eral. In contrast to the classical analysis of established and
outsiders, however, in our models of zombie infection, the
established groups become disintegrated. A new "figuration
of interdependent small groups" emerges, which needs not
only to survive against the zombie horde but "at the same
time as rivals for coveted opportunities" (Elias, 1996: 89
author's translation).
Conclusion
Inspired by the zombie apocalypse, we investigated three
different scenarios as a series of game models in the sense of
figurational sociology, which we analyzed using agent-based
Table 1.
Mean percentage
of edges retained
Average number of
human neighbors
Escape 66.5% 0.54
Sentimentality 70.2% 0.25
Stigmatization 60.4% 0.99
10 Methodological Innovations
simulation on a scale-free network topology. In the case of
the Escape scenario, it was shown that time is of the essence
when it comes to effective quarantine procedures on network
topologies. While this may be true for all infection scenarios,
it should be mentioned that the exponential growth pattern
observed here suggests that this is especially true for scale-
free graphs. Looking at the Sentimentality strategy (i.e. a
game model including affective valencies), we saw that it
practically negated the quarantine efforts while retaining
much of the original structure of the graph. In the
Stigmatization game model, we observed a strategy that
somewhat mirrored the effectiveness of the quarantine pro-
cedures of the Escape scenario, while also containing a hid-
den danger. The pre-emptive cutting of ties led to groups of
survivors, but at the same time decompartmentalized the net-
work in a way that made it very unlikely to contain the infec-
tion early on. Stigmatization almost automatically resulted in
small groups of locally connected agents, thereby creating
paths spanning the entire figuration and opening it up to the
dangers of infection.
We set out to prove the utility of taking a more serious
look at the zombie apocalypse. Setting the metaphor aside
for a moment, one can see that the three scenarios we
described can and do play a role in many real-life infection
scenarios. The social dynamics of stigmatization, exclusion,
or sentimentality influence the spread of diseases as well as
the way people interact with the infected and with each
other. Furthermore, the proposed approach of simulating
group relations represents a promising way of transferring
sociological theories, such as figurational sociology, into
formal models. Classical sociological methods of (figura-
tional) theory, such as observational studies or survey
research, cannot reveal the processual dynamics in the way
a simulation does. We conclude that figurational sociology
can profit from the techniques of simulation modeling. More
generally, social phenomena between groups and classes
competing with each other in a common figuration can be
explored using the proposed combination of relation theory
and simulation models. In doing so, social problems, refer-
ring to interaction and infection processes, can be analyzed
within this framework.
As we have shown, the social dynamics in infection sce-
narios can become systemic very fast and lead to unantici-
pated patterns in the spread of diseases, which was a lesson
the World Health Organization (WHO) had to learn the hard
way during the recent Ebola epidemic in West Africa. The
aptly named report "Why the Ebola outbreak has been under-
estimated" (WHO, 2014) shows that the effects that were
underestimated were mostly social in nature. Among them,
we find the Sentimentality scenario, as it is revealed that
many people tried to care for their relatives and loved ones at
home, which consequently undermined quarantine proce-
dures. Stigmatization and other group processes are also
mentioned as social dynamics that were overlooked and at
the same time contributed significantly to the failure to con-
tain and effectively combat the infection.
We do believe that this is true not only for the Ebola out-
break but also for basically all epidemics and processes that
behave in an infectious manner. Social dynamics, as well as
social structure, play a crucial role in how a disease unfolds
Figure 5. Average transitivity of graphs over time.
Riebling and Schmitz 11
and what consequences it has. It is a grave mistake to treat
and model diseases as though they were removed from the
social mores of human life. If the zombie apocalypse can
teach us anything, it is this.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article.
Notes
1. Meaning all stories modeled after I Am Legend by Richard
Matheson in 1954. Although the book calls the undead "vam-
pires," they are much closer in their behavior and description
to our modern zombies and have served as their blueprint. This
is also the first time the undead are shown as a viral infec-
tion that ultimately led to the downfall of society. Before I Am
Legend came out, the depiction of zombies was grounded in
the zombu, or undead servant of voodoo mythology, which
meant they were essentially slaves created by black magic.
The classic zombie lacked all the attributes we have grown
to associate with zombies today. They did not reproduce and
spread like an infection nor did they exist as part of an apoca-
lyptic scenario.
2. The camel case is used to distinguish between our simulation
model and the apocalyptic scenario featured in stories about
zombies.
3. The code for the simulation can be found in GitHub: https://
github.com/jrriebling/ZombieApocalypseSim
4. https://bitbucket.org/simpy/simpy/
5. https://github.com/kentwait/nxsim
6. It would be formally more correct to say that there cannot be an
algorithm M that can evaluate another algorithm just by looking
at its input and the rules that are applied to this input. Evaluation
in this sense means that M could find the answer without exe-
cuting the other algorithm. The original proof by Turing (1937)
is of course much more precise and more complex.
7. For a collection of typical zombie tropes, one can take a
look here: http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/
OurZombiesAreDifferent
References
Barabási A-L and Albert R (1999) Emergence of scaling in random
networks. Science 286: 509­512.
Baur N and Ernst S (2011) Towards a process-oriented methodology:
Modern social science research methods and Norbert Elias's
figurational sociology. The Sociological Review 59: 117­139.
Beeton N, Hoare A and Walker B (2014) Is there a zombicidal
maniac near you? You'd better hope so! In: Smith RJ (ed.)
Mathematical Modelling of Zombies. Ottawa, ON, Canada:
University of Ottawa Press, pp. 191­208.
Bishop KW (2010) American Zombie Gothic: The Rise and Fall
(and Rise) of the Walking Dead in Popular Culture. Jefferson,
NC: McFarland.
Brooks M (2003) The Zombie Survival Guide: Complete Protection
from the Living Dead (1st edn). New York: Broadway Books.
Cohen R, Erez K, ben-Avraham D, et al. (2000) Resilience of the
Internet to random breakdowns. Physical Review Letters 85:
4626­4628.
Crossley M and Amos M (2011) SimZombie: A case-study
in agent-based simulation construction. In: O'Shea J,
Nguyen NT, Crockett K, et al. (eds) Agent and Multi-Agent
Systems: Technologies and Applications. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 514­523:
Elias N (1939) Über den Prozeß der Zivilisation. Baden-Baden:
Suhrkamp.
Elias N (1996) Was ist Soziologie? München: Juventa.
Elias N and Scotson JL (1993) Etablierte und Aussenseiter.
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Elias N, Mennell S and Goudsblom J (1998) On Civilization, Power,
and Knowledge: Selected Writings. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Engler JC (2012) War of the living dead: An analysis of the permis-
sibility of the zombie weapon in modern international armed
conflict. SSRN scholarly paper no. ID 2171477. Rochester,
NY: Social Science Research Network (SSRN).
Epstein JM (2009) Modelling to contain pandemics. Nature 460:
687.
Epstein JM, Parker J, Cummings D, et al. (2008) Coupled conta-
gion dynamics of fear and disease: Mathematical and compu-
tational explorations. PLoS ONE 3: e3955.
Erdös P and Rényi A (1960) On the evolution of random graphs.
Publication of the Institute of Mathematics--Hungarian
Academy of Sciences 5: 17­61.
Eshel I, Samuelson L and Shaked A (1998) Altruists, egoists,
and hooligans in a local interaction model. The American
Economic Review 88(1): 157­179.
Fuhse JA (2012) Embedding the stranger: Ethnic categories and
cultural differences in social networks. Journal of Intercultural
Studies 33: 639­655.
Gardner M (1970) Mathematical games: The fantastic combina-
tions of John Conway's new solitaire game "life." Scientific
American 223: 120­123.
Gelman A (2010) "How many zombies do you know?" Using indi-
rect survey methods to measure alien attacks and outbreaks of
the undead. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv10036087.
Hagberg AA, Schult DA and Swart PJ (2008) Exploring network
structure, dynamics, and function using NetworkX. In:
Varoquaux G, Vaught T and Millman J (eds) Proceedings
of the 7th Python in Science Conference (SciPy2008):
Presented at the SciPy2008. Pasadena, CA, pp. 11­15.
Available at: http://math.lanl.gov/~hagberg/Publications/
hagberg-2008-exploring.shtml
Harper S (2002) Zombies, malls, and the consumerism debate:
George Romero's Dawn of the Dead. Journal of American
Popular Culture 1: 2000.
Hébert-Dufresne L, Marceau V, Noël P-A, et al. (2014) The
Social Zombie: Modelling undead outbreaks on social
networks. In: Smith? RJ (ed.) Mathematical Modelling of
Zombies. Ottawa, ON, Canada: University of Ottawa Press,
pp. 149­170.
Hufnagel L, Brockmann D and Geisel T (2004) Forecast and con-
trol of epidemics in a globalized world. Proceedings of the
12 Methodological Innovations
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
101: 15124­15129.
Jun T and Sethi R (2007) Neighborhood structure and the evolu-
tion of cooperation. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 17:
623­646.
Kirkman R and Steward D (2015) The Walking Dead Volume 24:
Life and Death. Berkeley, CA: Image Comics.
Luke DA and Stamatakis KA (2012) Systems science methods in
public health: Dynamics, networks, and agents. Annual Review
of Public Health 33: 357­376.
Munz P, Hudea I, Imad J, et al. (2009) When Zombies Attack!:
Mathematical modelling of an outbreak of zombie infection.
In: Tchuenche JM and Chiyaka C (eds) Infectious Disease
Modelling Research Progress. New York: Nova Science
Publishers, pp. 133­150.
Murray JD (2002) Mathematical biology: I. An Introduction
(Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics, 3rd edn). New York:
Springer.
Newman ME (2002) Spread of epidemic disease on networks.
Physical Review E 66: 016128.
Pastor-Satorras R and Vespignani A (2001) Epidemic spread-
ing in scale-free networks. Physical Review Letters 86:
3200­3203.
Smith? R (ed.) (2014) Mathematical Modelling of Zombies. Ottawa,
ON, Canada: University of Ottawa Press.
Spitznagel E (2010) George A. Romero: "Who Says Zombies Eat
Brains?" Vanity Fair, 27 May 2010. Available at: http://www.
vanityfair.com/hollywood/2010/05/george-romero
Stanley D (2012) The nurses' role in the prevention of Solanum
infection: Dealing with a zombie epidemic. Journal of Clinical
Nursing 21: 1606­1613.
Tang M, Mao X and Zhou H (2013) Zombie-city: A new artificial
society model. Journal of Computational Information Systems
9: 4989­4996.
Turing AM (1937) On computable numbers, with an application
to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society 42: 230­265.
Wasserman S and Faust K (1994) Social Network Analysis:
Methods and Applications, Structural Analysis in the Social
Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watts DJ and Strogatz SH (1998) Collective dynamics of small-
world networks. Nature 393: 440­442.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2014) Why the Ebola outbreak
has been underestimated. Available at: http://www.who.int/medi-
acentre/news/ebola/22-august-2014/en/ (accessed 30 May 15).
Author biographies
Jan Rasmus Riebling is a doctoral student at the chair of theoretical
sociology at the university of Bamberg. His main research interests
are computational models of social symbols, mathematical sociol-
ogy and network analysis.
Andreas Schmitz is a post-doc researcher at the chair of sociology,
University of Bonn, Germany. His major interests are sociological
theories (esp. field theory and practice theory) as well as relational
methodology.
