SAGE Open
January-March 2013: 1
­10
© The Author(s) 2012
DOI: 10.1177/2158244012472687
http://sgo.sagepub.com
Introduction
Child sexual abuse (CSA) is a social and public health con-
cern locally and globally (Gwirayi, 2010; Pinheiro, 2006;
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
[UNICEF], 2010; World Health Organization [WHO], 2004;
Zink, Klesges, Stevens, & Decker, 2009). Following research
evidence regarding the devastating consequences of CSA,
different countries have been and continue to grapple with
various prevention programs. Regrettably, like other aspects
of CSA, research on prevention programs also took center
stage in developed countries. The prevention strategies that
have been mooted cover both proximal and distal levels in
the child's ecology, namely, the individual, family, commu-
nity, and societal contexts. Extant literature suggests that
prevention programs dovetail into three main themes, which
are justice system practices, educational programs, and out-
reach programs. The evaluation evidence relevant to each
category of prevention is highlighted in this presentation.
Justice System Strategies
Several prevention programs have been developed under
this category. These include the strengthening of existing
legislation and policies, offender registration, community
notification, sentence lengthening and civil commitment,
and enhanced detection and control. Most of these preven-
tion programs were started in developed countries, espe-
cially the United States, while the focus in developing
countries, particularly in Africa, has been on harmonizing
national laws with international laws on child protection
(African Child Policy Forum [ACPF], 2008).
Harmonization of National and International Laws
Laws are the bricks and mortar of all efforts aimed at the
realization of child rights (ACPF, 2008). Laws are believed
to have "primary prevention" effects, because in theory the
fear of swift, certain, and serious punishment by the justice
system may deter the abuse before it happens (Finkelhor,
2009). In Zimbabwe, CSA is a criminal offense and is pun-
ishable by law. Existing pieces of legislation such as the
Sexual Offences Act (2001) and the Domestic Violence Act
(2006) have been harmonized with international law in an
effort to protect children against sexual abuse. Furthermore,
the Southern African region has made significant legal
472687
SGOXXX10.1177/215
8244012472687SAGE OpenGwirayi
2012
1Midlands State University, Gweru, Zimbabwe
Corresponding Author:
Pesanayi Gwirayi, Midlands State University, Educational Foundations,
Private Bag 9055, Gweru, N/A, Zimbabwe
Email: pgwirayi@gmail.com
Fighting Child Sexual Abuse: Perspectives
of Pupils From a Developing Country
Pesanayi Gwirayi1
Abstract
This study investigated secondary school pupils' views on strategies that can be used to prevent child sexual abuse (CSA).
A survey design was adopted as the operational framework for data gathering. Data were collected from three secondary
schools,all in the Gweru district of Zimbabwe.The sample comprised 268 secondary pupils (50% female;M age = 15.42,SD =
1.376).Each participant was asked to write down three main strategies that can be used to fight CSA on a given questionnaire.
The responses were then analyzed using the thematic content analysis technique.The study revealed that most pupils believed
that CSA can be prevented through teaching them about it and also reporting to the police. Another significant finding
was that pupils' responses tended to vary with gender and level of education.Whereas female respondents suggested that
CSA can be fought by avoiding strangers, saying no to sexual advances, and having reliable friends, their male counterparts
suggested teaching the community about CSA, forming new clubs, and enacting life imprisonment for perpetrators, among
other suggestions. In terms of level of education, Form 2 participants suggested avoiding strangers, staying home at night,
whereas their Form 4 counterparts suggested lessons for Guidance and Counseling, saying no to sexual advances, and having
reliable friends.These findings unequivocally demonstrate the need to vigorously engage secondary school pupils in activities
aimed at fighting CSA to safeguard their inalienable human rights.
Keywords
child sexual abuse, secondary school pupils, human rights, Zimbabwe
2 SAGE Open
achievements as shown by the harmonization of national
laws with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC;
United Nations General Assembly, 1989) and the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (Organization
of African Unity [OAU], 1990) in most countries. With
increased realization of the widespread assault on young
children, especially girls, governments in the region have
made attempts to curb the trend by enacting various sexual
offenses acts (Beyond Inequalities, 2008).
Despite the existence of national and international laws,
CSA remains a serious problem, not only in Zimbabwe but
alsoinotherdevelopinganddevelopedcountries.Accordingly,
the efficacy of existing laws has been seriously questioned.
Shumba (2006) believes that both local and international laws
have failed to protect children against sexual abuse. This is
buttressed by Briggs (2005) who reports that students have
been sexually abused by staff in some of Australia's most
expensive and prestigious schools and that those in boarding
schools seem to have been particularly vulnerable. Similar
reports have been made in different parts of the world. What
boggles the mind is why all this is happening when laws
against sexual abuse are in place. Several reasons have been
proffered to explain the status quo. Referring to the situation
in Australia, Briggs says that sex offenders are choosing
younger victims because they know that the criminal justice
system does not protect them. Regrettably, this characteriza-
tion seems to be symptomatic of most countries, including
Zimbabwe. For instance, Smith (2009) reveals that out of
4,000 known rape cases in the country, only 500 end up in
successful prosecutions. Similarly, inAfrica, nonexistent and/
or weak enforcement mechanisms have been cited (ACPF,
2008; Beyond Inequalities, 2008). As Van Niekerk (1999)
argues, the lack of or inadequate service delivery (especially
of legal services) from all sectors communicate to sex offend-
ers that they can continue to abuse with impunity, and to fam-
ilies and children that they will not be protected. Although
existing laws are meant to safeguard children against sexual
violence, literature suggests that they seem to have fallen
short in doing so, both in developing and developed
countries.
Offender Registration
Sex offender registration policies that allowed registries to
become public were introduced in the United States in 2006
(Kernsmith, Craun, & Foster, 2009). It is a prevention strategy
that is not yet in place in Zimbabwe and other developing
countries. According to Finkelhor (2009), the enforcement of
sex offender registration was meant to facilitate the apprehen-
sion of recidivistic offenders and also to prevent crime by
deterring existing and future offenders. However, critics argue
that such kind of registration makes it difficult for offenders
to reintegrate into society and thus violates the rights of those
who have already paid their debt to society, especially those
forced to register retroactively (Finkelhor, 2009).
In the United States, sex offender registration as a strat-
egy seems to be popular with the general public (Kernsmith
et al., 2009; Levenson, Brannon, Fortney, & Baker, 2007;
Phillips, 1998). For instance, in one study, 95% of the
respondents agreed that the name and photograph of regis-
tered sex offenders should be available to the public
(Levenson et al., 2007). In another study, more than 80% of
Washington State residents believed community notification
laws were very important (Phillips, 1998). Further evidence
for the popularity of sex offender registration comes from a
study with a general population sample from Massachusetts
which found that on a scale from 1 (strongly disapprove) to
10 (strongly approve), participants' score averaged more
than 8 in support of public sex offender registries (Proctor,
Badzinski, & Johnson, 2002).
Community Notification
Although community notification and registration are often
implemented and studied together, community notification
should be seen as a separate policy (Finkelhor, 2009). Two
goals of community notification as a strategy can be dis-
cerned. It is meant to help community members take steps
to protect themselves against specific offenders in their
midst as well as help law enforcement to educate the public
about how to protect children in general (Finkelhor, 2009).
Research evidence on the effectiveness of community
notification is inconclusive. For instance, a study that was
conducted in Washington State reported a drop in reoffending
following the implementation of notification but was not able
to disentangle the decline from the overall downward trend in
crime and other factors (Barnoski, 2005). Evidence for the
effectiveness of notification comes from a Minnesota study
that reported a significant decline in sex offense recidivism
among the highest risk offenders after a community notifica-
tion law was implemented (Duwe & Donnay, 2008). However,
a Wisconsin study found no effect of notification on whether
offenders were recommitted to prison (Zevitz, 2000).
According to Finkelhor (2009), researchers have shown that
notification makes families more likely to take steps to pro-
tect themselves. In addition, public opinion surveys have gen-
erally found the public to favor notification laws (Klima &
Lieb, 2008). Studies have documented the difficulties offend-
ers have in finding jobs and places to live, and in avoiding
harassment (Tewksbury, 2005), when their status is made
known.
Sentence Lengthening and Civil Commitment
Advocates of this strategy believe that it helps reduce the
number of offenders at large in the community capable of
committing new offenses. They also believe stiffer punish-
ments have deterrent effects. Similar sentiments were
echoed in a South African study in which Bird and Spurr
(2004) report that people were not satisfied with sentences
Gwirayi 3
given to rapists as evidenced by their clamoring for stiffer
sentences such as the death penalty and life imprisonment.
However, in Zimbabwe, the ineffectiveness of this strategy
is buttressed by a bill that was recently moved in Parliament,
proposing to castrate those accused of raping children. In
Zimbabwe, if found guilty of rape, the perpetrator faces a
maximum sentence of 10 years in prison (applies to survi-
vors below 12 years), whereas the maximum sentence for
statutory rape is 5 years in prison (survivor 12-16 years;
Sexual Offences Act, 2001). These sentences may not be
deterrent enough given that the survivor risks contracting
HIV and AIDS.
There is no research that can corroborate whether sen-
tencing practices have an effect on sex crime (Finkelhor,
2009). Some studies of crime in general have linked higher
incarceration rates with decreasing crime in general (Levitt,
2004). However, the effect is thought to result more from
incapacitation than from deterrence (Finkelhor, 2009). It is
not clear how much of the improvement is achieved through
longer sentences and how much through increased appre-
hension and incarceration of criminals (Finkelhor, 2009).
On the basis of current evidence, the extent to which longer
sentences and civil commitment do or can reduce overall
risks of child molestation cannot be determined.
Enhanced Detection and Arrest
The most elemental thing the criminal justice system can do
about a crime is to increase its detection and disclosure and
the likelihood that the offender will be arrested and prose-
cuted (Finkelhor, 2009). Disclosure can terminate abusive
relationships, which are frequently ongoing in CSA, and
prevent future ones. The offenders, who are caught, even if
they are not incapacitated, are deterred through embarrass-
ment, humiliation, and increased vigilance by members of
their social network (Finkelhor, 2009). Other potential
offenders may be deterred by the circulation of news that
offenders get caught. A case in point is the use of suggestion
boxes in Zimbabwe.
There is no research that has been conducted to investi-
gate whether increased law enforcement efforts to disclose,
investigate, and arrest have a deterrent effect on sex crime
against children (Finkelhor, 2009). For instance, it is difficult
to disentangle the role of suggestion boxes in Zimbabwe, in
leading to the disclosure of cases of CSA from the efforts of
other organizations and strategies.
According to Finkelhor (2009), the potential efficacy of
detection and arrest is confirmed by evidence that many child
sexual abusers offend repeatedly before getting caught, but
thereafter have relatively low recidivism rates compared with
other offenders. Getting caught thus plays a crucial role in
desistance (Smallbone, Marshall, & Wortley, 2008). General
criminology research tends to confirm that offenders are
deterred more by an increase in the risk of getting caught than
by an increase in the severity of the likely punishment
(Grasmick & Bryjak, 1980).
Educational Programs
Although most of the educational programs are school based,
they have also been aimed at families, teachers, youth service
workers, and others who may be in a position to intervene
(Goldman, 2007; Kenny, 2010; Wurtele, Moreno, & Kenny,
2008). The primary goal of educational programs has been to
impart skills to help children identify dangerous situations
and prevent unwanted forms of touching and contact, and
other ways in which offenders groom survivors, as well as to
teach them how to refuse approaches and invitations, how to
break off interactions, and how to summon help (Collings,
2007; Finkelhor, 2009). Educational programs also have
elaborate secondary goals. For instance, one has been to
short-circuit and report ongoing abuse (Finkelhor, 2009).
Another, most important from the prevention perspective, has
been to mitigate the negative consequences of abuse among
children who may have been exposed by helping them not
feel guilty or at fault (Finkelhor, 2009; Wurtele, 2009).
Different programs have targeted children of different ages,
ranging from preschoolers to elementary and middle school
children. For instance, in Zimbabwe, educational programs
were infused into the school curriculum in the mid-1990s
under the subject "Aids Education," which is taught from
primary to secondary level. At primary level, child abuse is
one of the topics in Aids Education and covers the various
aspects of sexual abuse such as forms of touch up to sexual
molestation. Furthermore, the Ministry of Justice, Legal and
Parliamentary Affairs through the Victim Friendly Court
launched a massive campaign against CSA involving both
primary and secondary school pupils (Manzongo, 2006). In
South Africa, Life Orientation subjects also include topics on
CSA. In the United States, prevention programs have been
bundled into larger safety and health education curricula
since the late 1980s (Finkelhor, 2009).
The involvement of parents in CSA prevention programs
continues to receive attention due to its perceived advan-
tages. Research shows that when parents are trained in abuse
prevention, children receive repeated exposure to prevention
information in the natural environment (Burgess & Wurtele,
1998; Wurtele et al., 2008). Furthermore, discussing CSA
with a parent might make it easier for a child to disclose to
that parent if abuse has occurred or occurs in future. Educated
parents would be better able to identify survivors of CSAand
how to respond to disclosures of abuse. Even more important
is the view that parents who have acquired information about
the grooming process of offenders have the potential of lim-
iting the access of potential perpetrators to their children
(Wurtele et al., 2008). Regrettably, most of the studies that
investigated the involvement of parents in prevention pro-
grams were conducted in developed countries, especially the
4 SAGE Open
United States (Kenny, 2010; Kenny & Wurtele, 2008; Wurtele
et al., 2008). For instance, a study that was conducted
in Colorado in the United States by Wurtele et al. (2008)
provides evidence that a relatively brief parent educational
program can improve parents' knowledge and ability to talk
with their children about personal safety. In another study that
was carried out in Florida, Kenny (2010) establishes that at
the 3-month follow-up, parents reported maintenance of their
child's knowledge and continued satisfaction with the
program.
Given some encouraging findings and a prevention
model that has proven successful in other youth safety areas,
it would seem prudent to continue to pursue educational
strategies to prevent sexual abuse (Finkelhor, 2009). Child-
focused sexual abuse prevention programs can teach chil-
dren to distinguish between abusive and nonabusive
situations, increase their knowledge, and enhance their per-
sonal safety skills (Wurtele, 2009). They can do so without
producing negative side effects and actually have positive
effects. There is also preliminary evidence that children are
able to apply this information in real-life situations and that
prevention programs have led to a reduced incidence of
CSA cases. Clearly, child-focused personal safety programs
play an important part in the effort to keep children safe
from sexual abuse, but they cannot single handedly accom-
plish CSA prevention. Although educational programs are
in place in both developing and developed countries, studies
that have been conducted to determine their efficacy remain
concentrated in developed countries especially the United
States, where they seem to have yielded considerable
success.
Outreach Programs
In addition to justice system efforts to control known offend-
ers and educational efforts directed at children, a number of
other strategies to prevent sexual abuse have been proposed
or implemented although on a smaller scale.
Drawing on other community-oriented (as opposed to
clinic or school based) primary prevention strategies in pub-
lic health, one recent concept has proposed trying to target
potential abusers (usually through public advertisements)
with messages that reinforce the awareness that their behav-
ior is wrong and harmful, and urging them to seek help, often
through a confidential telephone hot line (Finkelhor, 2009).
This approach appears to be prominent in Zimbabwe where
the Department of Public Relations in the Zimbabwe
Republic Police, and several nongovernmental organizations
such as Child Alert, Child-Line, Girl Child Network, among
others, often address public gatherings on the prevention of
CSA. For instance, the Child-Line has a hot line that children
can use to report incidents of sexual abuse.
Some surveys have shown that overall community knowl-
edge and attitudes about sexual abuse shift in the wake of
campaigns (Chasan-Taber & Tabachnick, 1999). Follow-up
studies have also shown that some offenders do contact the
hot lines, meaning that some potential offenders at least
attend to the publicity (Smallbone et al., 2008). It is not clear,
however, whether the hot line calls have prevented any
abuse.
Goal of the Study
Extant literature reveals that no strong scientific evidence
points as yet in the direction of one strategy or program to
prevent sexual abuse. Although educational programs have
had a positive impact especially in the United States, research
evidence on their efficacy is still equivocal. Other strategies
for preventing sexual abuse and its consequences, such as
community publicity efforts or outreach to potential offend-
ers, are certainly worth exploring as well. Unfortunately,
there is paucity in literature on the perspectives of children,
the main beneficiaries of CSA prevention programs. A few
Western studies that attempted to close this gap (e.g.,
Levenson et al., 2007; Phillips, 1998; Proctor et al., 2002)
targeted the general population. To a larger extent, the effi-
cacy of CSA prevention programs hinges on how they are
viewed by those whom they are intended to help. Against this
backdrop, the goal of this study was to increase knowledge
and provide evidence on pupils' perspectives regarding
CSA prevention strategies. This study thus sought to close a
gap in both extant and local literature. To this effect, it was
therefore prudent to engage secondary school pupils in
Gweru district of Zimbabwe to determine strategies which
they think can be effective in protecting them against sexual
abuse. Knowledge about pupils' perspectives will help build
a robust evidence base that will be used to improve the qual-
ity and efficacy of CSA prevention strategies and policies.
Research Design
The centrality of the research design in any research
endeavor is highlighted by Hall (1996) who says that "the
test question for any academic discussion which is based on
research findings is whether the conclusions are justified by
the research design" (p. 17). This study adopted the descrip-
tive survey strategy because survey research has the capacity
to collect data for describing populations that are too large to
observe directly (Babbie & Mouton, 2005). Both quantita-
tive and qualitative data were used. Using this design, this
study was able to gain a cross section of the views of second-
ary school pupils in Gweru urban district, regarding strate-
gies that they considered could be used to protect them
against sexual abuse.
Participants
The sample comprised 268 pupils attending Gweru district
day secondary schools (50% female; M age = 15.42, SD =
1.376). The identification of these participants was based on
Gwirayi 5
three premises. First, local literature shows that secondary
school pupils are vulnerable to sexual abuse (Makoni, 2006;
Thompson, 2009). Second, as adolescents, secondary school
pupils are a high-risk population group as they are more
likely to be sexually active. Third, these pupils were pre-
ferred because they were believed to be mature enough to
have the language to express their perspectives in English.
Sampling Procedure
A two-stage random sampling procedure was used. In the
first stage, three day secondary schools were randomly
selected from a cluster of seven in Gweru district. In the
second stage, stratified random sampling was used to select
Forms 2 and 4 pupils at each participating school (Marvasti,
2004).
Research Instruments
In this study, the main data collection instrument was a brief
self-administered questionnaire. Babbie and Mouton (2005)
cite questionnaires as the most common instruments for
data collection in survey research. In view of the sensitivity
associated with CSA, a self-reporting questionnaire was
used in this study because it provided greater anonymity
thereby increasing the likelihood of obtaining information
in a less threatening way. The questionnaire had two major
parts. In the first part, participants were asked to indicate
their gender and level of education. The second part was
structured as follows: How can secondary school pupils be
protected against sexual abuse? List down three ways that
you think can be used in the space provided. The question-
naire was pilot tested to 20 Form 2 and 20 Form 4 pupils at
a secondary school that did not take part in this study, and
was found to be able to produce data that can measure
pupils' perspectives on strategies that can protect them
against sexual abuse.
Ethical Considerations
Before collecting data, the researcher sought for permission
from the Ministry of Education Sport and Culture, which was
granted. In addition, the researcher also asked for informed
consent from all the participants (Sarantakos, 2005). The
researcher explained the purpose of the study to the partici-
pants and allowed them to ask questions about the research
before asking them to complete the questionnaire (Babbie &
Mouton, 2005). It was also made clear to the participants that
taking part in the study was voluntary, and that those who
chose to participate were free to withdraw their participation
at any stage if they so wished.
Debriefing and counseling are necessary especially in
situations where the researcher encounter leaves the partici-
pants stressed or with serious questions (Tang, 2002). This
had important implications for this study because it dealt
with a very sensitive issue. In this regard, the school coun-
selor was available during the administration of question-
naires to provide counseling and follow-up in the event of
any pupil showing emotional distress (Yuen, 2007). In addi-
tion, all participants were given information pamphlets on
Gweru-based organizations, which provide professional
assistance on issues relating to CSA.
Data Collection Procedure
In this study, the self-reporting questionnaires were adminis-
tered personally by the researcher to ensure a high response
rate (Sarantakos, 2005). On the agreed dates with the school
heads, and with the cooperation of the class teachers, the
researcher distributed the questionnaires to the pupils in their
classrooms. Data were collected during free periods to mini-
mize interruption of other school activities. Participants were
asked to sit separately so that they could feel free to complete
the questionnaire without sharing their answers.
Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using the thematic content analysis tech-
nique (Marvasti, 2004). This technique allowed for both
qualitative and quantitative data that were gathered in this
study. In addition, this technique facilitated the process of
identifying themes that emerged in this study. Thematic con-
tent analysis enabled the researcher to identify the reoccur-
ring suggestions on how secondary school pupils can be
protected against sexual abuse. Themes that emerged from
this study were presented in tables, with percentages showing
their distribution and popularity among the participants.
Results
This section presents the views of the participants regarding
strategies that can be used to protect secondary school pupils
against sexual abuse. Results are presented under two main
subheadings, distinguished by gender and level of education.
This study specifically sought to address the following
research question:
Research Question 1: How can secondary school
pupils be protected against sexual abuse?
Participants' Suggested Strategies of Fighting
Sexual Abuse by Gender
Participants were asked to suggest ways that they think can
help protect secondary school pupils against sexual abuse.
As shown in Table 1, males' and females' suggestions on
strategies that can be used to fight CSA have similarities as
well as differences. For instance, both male and female par-
ticipants acknowledged that CSA can be fought by teaching
children about it, introducing Guidance and Counseling in
6 SAGE Open
Table 1. Participants' Suggested CSA Prevention Strategies by Gender
Suggested prevention strategy Males (%) Females (%)
Schools should offer lessons on Guidance and Counseling 20.1 17.2
Teaching children about sexual abuse in schools 54.5 70.1
Reporting any form of sexual abuse to the police 38.1 26.1
Girls should wear decent clothes 23.0 9.0
Each school should have a suggestion box 17.2 11.2
Staying home at night 9.0 13.4
Children should always avoid talking to strangers 11.2 24.6
Children should say no to sexual activities 17.9 26.9
Choosing good friends 13.4 21.6
Banning discos in schools 7.5 9.0
Children should avoid people they do not trust 17.2 13.4
Children must be taught not to trust anyone 8.2 10.4
Forming new clubs where children can give each other knowledge about sexual abuse 15.7 11.9
Children must know their rights 10.4 15.7
Avoid walking in the bush 4.5 2.2
Life imprisonment for perpetrators 3.7 0
People who sexually abuse children must be hanged 2.3 6.0
Teaching the community about CSA 5.2 0
Making use of the media to increase awareness about CSA 3.7 7.4
Children must move in groups when going to and coming from school 3.0 9.0
Students should not take alcohol 3.0 8.2
Showing children dangers of sexual activities by using pictures of people with HIV and AIDS 6.7 3.7
School gates must be locked all the time 9.0 11.2
Parents must teach children about sexual abuse at home 4.5 9.7
Note: CSA = child sexual abuse.
schools, as well as reporting any incident of sexual abuse to
the police. However, some variations can be discerned, sug-
gesting the interaction of gender. For example, female
respondents suggested that CSA can be fought by avoiding
strangers, saying no to sexual advances, and having reliable
friends, whereas their male counterparts, although in small
proportions, suggested teaching the community about CSA,
forming new clubs where children can share knowledge
about CSA, and enacting a life imprisonment sentence for
would-be perpetrators.
Participants' Suggested Strategies of Fighting
CSA by Level of Education
Findings on participants' views on ways of fighting CSA
were also disaggregated by level of education (Table 2). By
and large, both Form 2 and Form 4 participants share the
premises that CSA can be fought by teaching children about
it, and reporting any incident to the police. However, some
variations were noted. For instance, Form 2 participants sug-
gested avoiding strangers, staying home at night, and mov-
ing in groups on the way to and from school, whereas those
who were in Form 4 suggested the introduction of Guidance
and Counseling, saying no to any sexual advances, having
reliable friends, teaching children about their rights, and also
teaching the community about CSA.
Discussion
In this study, participants were asked to suggest strategies
that can be used to protect them against sexual abuse. It
emerged that, by and large, the distribution of the suggested
strategies was influenced by the gender and level of educa-
tion of the participants. Consistent with research (Collings,
2007; Finkelhor, 2009; Wurtele, 2009), the present study
established that the main strategy that participants unani-
mously believed can help protect them against sexual abuse
is by teaching them about the social vice. Although this view
was shared by both Forms 2 and 4 participants, there was a
preponderance of females. However, there is paucity of lit-
erature both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere, against which to
compare the influence of gender in preferring to fight sexual
abuse by teaching about it. One may be tempted to believe
that more females than males preferred to be taught about
sexual abuse perhaps because they are more vulnerable to
sexual abuse as suggested by the majority of international
literature.
Allied to teaching children about sexual abuse, this study
further established variations that differed with both levels of
education and gender, but were consistent with literature.
For instance, it emerged that Form 4 females suggested
teaching children about their rights, choosing reliable friends,
and saying no to sexual activities. Consistent with research,
Gwirayi 7
some earlier studies have also pointed out that choosing reli-
able friends (Newcomb, Munoz, & Carmona, 2009) and say-
ing no to sexual activities (Collings, 2007; Wurtele, 2009)
can help in protecting children against sexual abuse.
Similarly, a recent study that was conducted in Zimbabwe by
Gwirayi and Shumba (2011) report that secondary school
pupils were not aware of their rights except for education. In
this regard, the suggestion coming from participants in this
study has far reaching implications given that CSA in its
various forms is a violation of their rights as enshrined by the
CRC (United Nations General Assembly, 1989) and African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of Children (OAU, 1990).
Sexual abuse is a form of violence that undermines the real-
ization of children's rights. Arguably, it is through education
that these adolescents can be equipped with skills to safe-
guard their rights. As Gwirayi and Shumba opine, children's
awareness of their rights denotes some form of empower-
ment, which has a positive effect on the other domains of
their lives. However, what remains difficult to interpret in
this study is why Form 4 females were particularly apt to
raise the issue concerning children's rights.
Consistent with literature, participants suggested the for-
mation of new clubs in schools as a way of fighting CSA.
Regrettably, this idea was suggested by a small proportion of
males. The role of peers in sharing vital information has been
reported in earlier studies (Chaffin, Kelleher, & Hollenberg,
1996). Consistent with the idea that adolescents need to sep-
arate from their families and develop into autonomous indi-
viduals, adolescents are more likely to accept feedback from
peers than they are from adults (Chaffin et al., 1996).
Furthermore, the study noted other variations in sugges-
tions that were associated with Form 4 males but generally
consistent with research. For instance, Form 4 males were
more likely to suggest having a suggestion box at each school,
showing children dangers of sexual activities by using pic-
tures of people with HIV andAIDS, and that girls should wear
decent clothes. The use of pictures with people suffering from
HIV and AIDS is important given that research has reported
an association between the perpetration of CSA and HIV and
AIDS and contracting sexually transmitted infections (Lalor,
2008; Pinheiro, 2006; WHO, 2004). This suggestion further
illustrates respondents' awareness of the various implications
of CSA for their health. However, male concern with girls
wearing indecent and revealing clothes is characteristic of the
Zimbabwean patriarchal society (Nhundu & Shumba, 2001).
In the same vein, a study that investigated pupils' perceptions
of sexual abuse by teachers in Zimbabwean schools reported
that one of the reasons cited by male respondents was that girls
wear clothes that reveal their bodies (Shumba et al., 2008).
This mentality by male adolescents, which was also confirmed
in this study, further buttresses the need for more education on
issues to do with CSA.
Table 2. Participants' Suggested CSA Prevention Strategies by Level of Education
Suggested prevention strategy Form 2 (%) Form 4 (%)
Schools should offer lessons on Guidance and Counseling 9.0 28.4
Teaching children about sexual abuse in schools 60.0 65.7
Reporting any form of sexual abuse to the police 30.6 33.6
Girls should wear decent clothes 9.7 22.4
Each school should have a suggestion box 11.2 17.2
Staying home at night 14.2 8.2
Children should always avoid talking to strangers 22.5 13.4
Children should say no to sexual activities 13.3 31.3
Choosing good friends 12.7 22.4
Banning discos in schools 5.2 11.3
Children avoid people they do not trust 14.3 16.4
Children must be taught not to trust anyone 9.7 16.6
Forming new clubs where children can give each other knowledge about sexual abuse 10.4 17.2
Children must know their rights 8.2 17.9
Avoid walking in the bush 4.5 2.2
Life imprisonment for perpetrators 0.7 3.0
People who sexually abuse children must be hanged 3.0 5.2
Teaching the community about CSA 0 5.4
Making use of the media to increase awareness about CSA 6.7 4.5
Children must move in groups when going to and coming from school 9.7 2.2
Students should not take alcohol 1.5 9.8
Showing children dangers of sexual activities by using pictures of people with HIV and AIDS 3.0 7.5
School gates must be locked all the time 14.2 6.0
Parents must teach children about sexual abuse at home 6.0 8.2
Note: CSA = child sexual abuse.
8 SAGE Open
The need to teach children about sexual abuse was further
buttressed by responses that mainly came from Form 2
females. They suggested that secondary school pupils can be
protected against sexual abuse by staying home at night,
avoiding talking to strangers, moving in groups when going
to and coming from school, and keeping school gates locked
all the time. Form 2 males suggested avoiding walking in the
bush. Although by and large, participants of both genders
and forms suggested that children must avoid people they do
not trust, most of the suggestions implying the need for more
education and lack of knowledge about CSA came from
Form 2 participants. Perhaps this could have been a function
of their cognitive development relative to their Form 4 coun-
terparts. The above suggestions clearly show pupils' lack of
understanding about the dynamics of CSA such as its loca-
tion and type of perpetrators. In this regard, participants did
not consider family members, relatives, teenagers, or even
trusted acquaintances such as schoolteachers, as potential
perpetrators of sexual abuse. Research is unequivocal that
perpetrators first gain the child's trust before abusing him or
her (Spies, 2006; Wurtele, 2009), hence CSA is a betrayal of
trust. Thus, participants' suggestion of avoiding people they
do not trust further supports the need for more education on
CSAgiven that the majority of perpetrators are people known
very well by the survivors.
Research suggests that while child-focused sexual abuse
prevention programs play an important part in the effort to
keep children safe from sexual abuse, they cannot single
handedly accomplish CSA prevention. In fact, literature
shows that CSA prevention programs cannot be effective
without parents (Wurtele et al., 2008). When parents are
trained as prevention educators, their children receive
repeated exposure to prevention information in the natural
environment, thus providing a series of booster sessions to
supplement other prevention efforts (Wurtele et al., 2008).
Consistent with research, this study established the involve-
ment of parents in the fight against CSA albeit this finding
was reported by a small proportion of Form 4 females. In this
regard, adolescents presumed that their parents were
informed enough to teach them about sexual abuse, some-
thing that should not be taken for granted.
Furthermore, research suggests that one way of prevent-
ing the occurrence of sexual abuse is by educating the com-
munity at large about CSA (Petersen, Bhana, & McKay,
2005). Unfortunately, few prevention interventions have
been aimed at the general public (Wurtele et al., 2008). This
finding was confirmed in this study in that only a small pro-
portion of Form 4 males suggested involving the commu-
nity in the fight against CSA. This is a serious omission
given that most cases of CSA are committed at home and in
the perpetrator's home. CSA is a social problem that affects
the various levels of society, including the community. The
failure to link the fight against CSA with the community
further buttresses the need for more education on prevention
efforts. Given that communities have been involved in
fighting various forms of crime, they can also be reined in
the fight against this social vice, which is a crime by both
national and international laws.
Finally, in this study, participants scarcely referred to jus-
tice system strategies in their responses. Only a small propor-
tion of males suggested an increase in jail sentences and
capital punishment. Two interpretations can be gleaned in this
regard. First, this finding could be a reflection of participants'
lack of trust in the justice system strategies, which is sup-
ported by literature suggesting that laws have failed to protect
children against sexual abuse (Briggs, 2005; Shumba, 2006).
Second, this finding may suggest that participants were not
aware of justice system strategies that are there to safeguard
them against sexual abuse. Accordingly, this finding may fur-
ther support the need for more education on CSA prevention
programs and policies.
Conclusion
This study aimed at investigating pupils' perspectives on
strategies that can be used to protect them against CSA. It
established that most of the CSA prevention strategies which
participants suggested are consistent with international lit-
erature. These include teaching children about sexual abuse,
introducing Guidance and Counseling in schools, and
reporting any incident of abuse to the police. However, the
need for more education on CSA prevention programs and
policies is predicated on the premise that little reference was
made to parental and community involvement as well as the
role of justice system strategies in the fight against sexual
abuse. Contrary to extant literature, pupils' responses were
mediated by gender and level of education, a noteworthy
caveat in the area under investigation.
Recommendations
Based on the above research findings, this study makes the
following recommendations:
·
· There is need to increase support toward school-
based programs that focus on prevention of CSA
because they are an important strategy that can
increase the skills and confidence necessary to
avoid sexual abuse. However, such programs
should be differentiated according to the level of
education of the students to cater for differences in
cognitive development.
·
· This study strongly recommends active parent
involvement in CSA prevention programs, utilizing
a concurrent parent and child format, rather than
targeting either parents or children alone. Simulta-
neous education of both parents and children allows
for increased communication about personal safety,
and the joint participation of parent and child may
positively affect the parent­child relationship and
Gwirayi 9
the ease with which families communicate about
this sensitive issue. Educating parents about CSA
can help dispel the myth they commonly hold about
CSA and encourage them to provide a safer home
environment for their children, thereby reducing the
likelihood of victimization.
·
· More resources should be channeled toward the
establishment of child protection committees in
the various communities where children reside.
Although these committees are believed to be in
place, no mention was made about them in this
study suggesting their lack of publicity, perhaps
obscurity.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research and/or
authorship of this article.
References
African Child Policy Forum. (2008). The African report on child
wellbeing: How child-friendly are African governments? Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia: Author.
Babbie, E., & Mouton, J. (2005). The practice of social research.
Cape Town: Oxford University Press Southern Africa.
Barnoski, R. (2005). Sex offender sentencing in Washington State:
Has community notification reduced recidivism rates? Olym-
pia: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.
Beyond Inequalities. (2008). The girl child. Available from http://
www.sardc.net
Bird, W., & Spurr, N. (2004). Media representations of baby rape:
The case of "BabyTshepang." In L. M. Richter, A. Dawes, &
C. Higson-Smith (Eds.), Sexual abuse of young children in
Southern Africa (pp. 36-52). Cape Town, South Africa: Human
Sciences Research Council.
Briggs, F. (2005, March 9). Every school's worst nightmare: Child
sexual Abuse. AW Jones Oration, The University of Adelaide,
the Elders Hall, Adelaide.
Burgess, E., & Wurtele, S. (1998). Enhancing parent-child com-
munication about sexual abuse: A pilot study. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 22, 1167-1175.
Chaffin, M., Kelleher, K., & Hollenberg, J. (1996). Onset of physi-
cal abuse and neglect: Psychiatric, substance abuse, and social
risk factors from prospective community data. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 20, 191-203.
Chasan-Taber, L., & Tabachnick, J. (1999). Evaluation of a child
sexual abuse prevention program. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of
Research and Treatment, 11, 279-292.
Collings, S. J. (2007). Emerging issues in research on school-based
sexual abuse prevention programmes. Child Abuse Research in
South Africa, 8, 60-68.
Domestic Violence Act [Chapter 5; 16] Act 14/2006. Harare: Gov-
ernment of Zimbabwe.
Duwe, G., & Donnay, W. (2008). The impact of Megan's law on sex
offender recidivism: The Minnesota experience. Criminology,
46, 411-446.
Finkelhor, D. (2009). The prevention of childhood sexual abuse.
The Future of Children, 19(2), 169-194.
Goldman, J. D. (2007). Primary school student-teachers' knowl-
edge and understandings of child sexual abuse and its manda-
tory reporting. International Journal of Educational Research,
46, 368-381.
Grasmick, H. G., & Bryjak, G. J. (1980). The deterrent effect of
perceived severity of punishment. Social Forces, 59, 471-491.
Gwirayi, P. (2010). The role of macro-systemic contexts in under-
standing the aetiology and epidemiology of child sexual abuse
in Southern Africa. Journal of Sustainable Development in
Africa, 12(2), 253-268.
Gwirayi, P., & Shumba, A. (2011). Children's rights: How much do
Zimbabwe urban secondary school pupils? International Jour-
nal of Children's Rights, 19, 195-204.
Hall, V. (1996). Dancing on the ceiling: A study of women manag-
ers in education. London, England: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Kenny, M. C. (2010). Child sexual abuse education with ethnically
diverse families: A preliminary analysis. Children and Youth
Services Review, 32, 981-989.
Kenny, M. C., & Wurtele, S. K. (2008). Preschoolers' knowledge
of genital terminology: A comparison of English and Spanish
speakers. American Journal of Sexuality Education, 3, 345-
354.
Kernsmith, P. D., Craun, S. W., & Foster, J. (2009). Public attitudes
toward sexual offenders and sex offender registration. Journal
of Child Sexual Abuse, 18, 290-301.
Klima, T., & Lieb, R. (2008). Risk assessments instruments to pre-
dict recidivism of sex Offenders: Practices in Washington State.
Olympia: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.
Lalor, K. (2008). Child sexual abuse and HIV transmission in sub-
Saharan Africa. Child Abuse Review, 17, 94-107.
Levenson, J. S., Brannon, Y. N., Fortney, T., & Baker, J. (2007).
Public perceptions about sex offenders and community protec-
tion policies. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, 7(1),
1-25.
Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s:
Four factors that explain the decline and six that do not. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18, 163-190.
Makoni, B. (2006). Beauty pageants expose underage girls to sex-
ual abuse. Chitungwiza, Zimbabwe: Girl Child Network.
Manzongo, J. (2006, September 19). State launches campaign
against child sexual abuse. The Herald. Retrieved from
allafrica.com/stories/200609190245.html
Marvasti, A. B. (2004). Qualitative research in sociology. London,
England: SAGE.
Newcomb, M. D., Munoz, D. T., & Carmona, J. V. (2009). Child
sexual abuse consequences in community samples of Latino
and European American adolescents. Child Abuse & Neglect,
33, 533-544.
10 SAGE Open
Nhundu, T., & Shumba, A. (2001). The nature and frequency of
reported cases of teacher perpetrated child sexual abuse in rural
primary schools in Zimbabwe. Child Abuse & Neglect, 25,
1517-1534.
Organization of African Unity. (1990). African charter on the rights
and welfare of the child (Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49). Retrieved
from http://www.umn.edu/humanrts/africa/afchild.htm
Petersen, L., Bhana, A., & McKay, M. (2005). Sexual violence
and youth in South Africa: The need for community-based
prevention Interventions. Child Abuse & Neglect, 29, 1233-
1248.
Phillips, D. M. (1998). Community notification as viewed by Wash-
ington's citizens [Electronic version]. Olympia: Washington
State Institute for Public Policy.
Pinheiro, P. S. (2006). The UN Secretary General's report on
violence against children: The way forward. New York, NY:
United Nations.
Proctor, J. L., Badzinski, D. M., & Johnson, M. (2002). The impact
of media on knowledge and perceptions of Megan's law. Crimi-
nal Justice Policy Review, 13, 356-379.
Sarantakos, S. (2005). Social research (3rd ed.). London, England:
Macmillan.
Sexual Offences Act [Chapter 9:21]. Act 8/2001. Harare: Govern-
ment of Zimbabwe.
Shumba, A. (2006). Child abuse in schools and the law in Zim-
babwe: Current issues and challenges in the new millennium.
Child Abuse Research in South Africa, 7(2), 48-60.
Shumba, A., Gwirayi, P., Shumba, J., Maphosa, C., Chireshe, R.,
Gudyanga, E., & Makura, A. H. (2008). Pupils' perceptions of
sexual abuse by teachers in Zimbabwe. Journal of Psychology
in Africa, 18(2), 279-282.
Smallbone, S., Marshall, W. L., & Wortley, R. (2008). Preventing
child sexual abuse: Evidence, policy and practice (1st ed.).
New York, NY: Willan Publishing.
Smith, D. (2009). Child rape epidemic in Zimbabwe. Available
from http://Johannesburg guardian.co.uk
Spies, G. M. (2006). The effect of sexual abuse on a child. In G. M.
Spies (Ed.), Sexual abuse: Dynamics, assessment and healing
(pp. 44-58). Pretoria, South Africa: Van Schaik Publishers.
Tang, C. S. (2002). Childhood experience of sexual abuse among
Hong Kong Chinese college students. Child Abuse & Neglect,
26, 23-37.
Tewksbury, R. (2005). Collateral consequences of sex offender reg-
istration. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 21, 67-81.
Thompson, M. (2009). Zimbabwe girls trade sex for food. Available
from http://news.bbc.co.uk
United Nations General Assembly. (1989). Adoption of a Conven-
tion on the Rights of the Child (UN Doc. A/Res/44/25). New
York, NY: United Nations.
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. (2010).
Inequities in the fulfillment of children's rights in South Africa:
A statistical review. Pretoria, South Africa: Author.
Van Niekerk, J. (1999, March 16-18). Children and survival sex in
Kwazulu-Natal. Paper presented at the National Consultative
Conference Against the Sexual Exploitation of Children, Uni-
versity of the Western Cape, South Africa.
World Health Organization. (2004, August 30-September 3). Child
sexual abuse: A Salient health emergency. In Fifty-fourth
Session, Regional Committee for Africa, Brazzaville, Republic
of Congo.
Wurtele, S. K. (2009). Preventing sexual abuse of children in the
twenty-first century: Preparing for the challenges and opportu-
nities. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 18, 1-18.
Wurtele, S. K., Moreno, T., & Kenny, M. (2008). Evaluation of a
sexual abuse prevention workshop for parents of young chil-
dren. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma, 1, 331-340.
Yuen, C. W. (2007). Child maltreatment in Malaysia: Prevalence,
correlates, and probable health and behavioural consequences
(Unpublished PhD Thesis). Queensland University of Technol-
ogy, Brisbane, Australia.
Zevitz, R. G. (2000). Sex offender notification: Assessing the
impact in Wisconsin (US). Washington, DC: National Institute
of Justice.
Zink, T., Klesges, L., Stevens, S., & Decker, P. (2009). The devel-
opment of a sexual abuse severity score: Characteristics of
childhood sexual abuse associated with trauma symptomatol-
ogy, somatization, and alcohol abuse. Journal of Interpersonal
Violence, 24, 537-546.
Bio
Pesanayi Gwirayi is an associate professor in sociology of educa-
tion at the Midlands State University in Zimbabwe. His research
interests include child maltreatment, child rights, equality of edu-
cational opportunity, and gender issues in education.
