Evolutionary Psychology
www.epjournal.net ­ 2014. 12(2): 403-416
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Original Article
Revisiting the Survival Mnemonic Effect in Children
Josefa N. S. Pand eirada, Department of Education, University of Aveiro, Portugal; Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA; Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, Portugal.
Email: josefa@ua.pt (Corresponding author).
Luísa Pires, Department of Education, University of Aveiro, Portugal.
Sandra C. Soares, Department of Education, University of Aveiro, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Imaging
and Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, Portugal.
Abstract: The survival processing paradigm is designed to explore the adaptive nature of
memory functioning. The mnemonic advantage of processing information in fitness-
relevant contexts, as has been demonstrated using this paradigm, is now well established,
particularly in young adults; this phenomenon is often referred to as the "survival
processing effect." In the current experiment, we revisited the investigation of this effect in
children and tested it in a new cultural group, using a procedure that differs from the
existing studies with children. A group of 40 Portuguese children rated the relevance of
unrelated words to a survival and a new moving scenario. This encoding task was followed
by a surprise free-recall task. Akin to what is typically found, survival processing produced
better memory performance than the control condition (moving). These data put on firmer
ground the idea that a mnemonic tuning to fitness-relevant encodings is present early in
development. The theoretical importance of this result to the adaptive memory literature is
discussed, as well as potential practical implications of this kind of approach to the study of
memory in children.
Keywords: survival processing, episodic memory, children, evolution, development
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Introduction
The idea that our memory systems might have been shaped throughout our
evolution has received special attention in recent years. Although this idea has been around
for quite some time (e.g., Darwin, 1859; Tooby and Cosmides, 1992), the first empirical
work was reported only in 2007 by Nairne, Thompson, and Pandeirada. This first study
revealed that when people thought about the relevance of information for an imagined
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -404-
survival situation, one in which their survival was at risk (being stranded in a foreign land
without any basic survival materials), their memory for the processed information was
better than when the same information was processed under various control conditions
(e.g., moving to a foreign land or pleasantness ratings). Many replications of the mnemonic
advantage of processing information with respect to this survival situation have followed. It
is now established that the "survival processing effect" occurs in both between- and within-
subject designs, in both free recall and recognition (e.g., Kang, McDermott, and Cohen,
2008; Nairne et al., 2007), and leads to better memory performance than most of the
encoding conditions widely recognized to produce good memory performance (Nairne,
Pandeirada, and Thompson, 2008). In addition, the effect does not depend on the type of
material used, as it occurs for random word sets (e.g., Nairne and Pandeirada, 2011) and
pictures (Otgaar, Smeets, and van Bergen, 2010). Although the effect is quite robust under
these conditions, recent studies have failed to find survival processing advantages in more
implicit testing conditions, such as source memory (Bröder, Krüger, and Schütte, 2011) and
implicit memory tests (Tse and Altarriba, 2010).
From an evolutionary perspective, if this fitness-relevance tuning is indeed a
functional and evolutionarily relevant characteristic of our memory systems, one might
expect it to occur across the various stages of human development. Indeed, before reaching
the reproductive stage when they could pass along their genetic heritage, children have to
face many challenges, making this stage of development a strong target of natural selection
(e.g., King and Bjorklund, 2010). As Bjorklund and Pellegrini (2000) put it:
...our ancestors also developed, and before organisms can reproduce to get their
genes into the next generation, they must first reach adulthood. For a slow-
developing species such as humans, that can be a long and treacherous path. How
people develop is important to eventual reproductive success... (p. 1704)
In agreement with this idea, studies in various areas have demonstrated that children are
able to acquire knowledge relevant to their survival at a very young age, such as the
difference between potential agents and non-agents (Newman, Keil, Kuhlmeier, and Wynn,
2010). Children also seem to prioritize their attention to potential threatening stimuli in
complex visual displays such as snakes and threatening faces (e.g., LoBue and DeLoache,
2008; LoBue and DeLoache, 2010). Children are also predisposed to remember the faces of
potentially harmful individuals (Kinzler and Shutts, 2008). Even the overestimation
children sometimes show for various skills, memory performance included, has been
interpreted as having potential adaptive value (Shin, Bjorklund, and Beck, 2007). All of
these aspects can be conceptualized as cognitive biases with adaptive value that allow
children to thrive through this developmental phase. In the same line, it would be important
to explore if children's memory is also sensitive to the fitness-relevant component
conveyed in the survival processing paradigm. Better retention of information when it is
processed for fundamental aspects of human survival­finding food, shelter, and protection
from predators­would certainly increase the chances of children reaching a reproductive
phase and passing along their genes to the future generations.
Most of the research on the survival processing effect has been conducted in young
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -405-
adults, although the effect has also been reported in elderly populations (Faria, Pinho,
Gonçalves, and Pandeirada, 2009; Nouchi, 2011; Pandeirada, Pinho, and Faria, 2014). The
hypothesis that the survival advantage is developmentally invariant, particularly if it can be
observed in children, has been explored in a couple of previous papers. Otgaar and Smeets
(2010, Experiment 2) tested the survival processing effect in children (8 and 11 years-old),
and also measured whether survival processing leads to differential levels of false recall as
compared to the control conditions. In their experiment, children were asked to rate
thematically related lists of words adopted from the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm
(e.g., Roediger and McDermott, 1995) in one of three conditions: survival, moving, or
pleasantness. Higher correct recall was obtained for the survival rated words as compared
to the two control conditions. However, the false alarm rate for the critical lures was also
higher for survival than for the controls; this pattern of results occurred for the overall
intrusion rate as well (but only for the older children). When net accuracy was used as the
dependent measure, no survival advantage was obtained. It is worth noting, however, that
the use of theme-related lists of items could have affected the extent to which survival
processing affected memory performance. Some studies have obtained the survival
processing effect in young adults when lists of semantically related items are used (Nairne
and Pandeirada, 2008a), but others have not (Burns, Burns, and Hwang, 2011).
More recently, Aslan and Bäuml (2012) reported two within-subject experiments in
which children from three different age groups (4-6years, 7-8 years, and 9-10 years) rated
the usefulness of random words to the typical survival scenario and to a variety of control
conditions. In the first experiment, survival was compared to a pleasantness-rating
condition and a word-length rating task. The results on a final surprise yes-no recognition
test were consistent across the three age groups and revealed better memory performance
for the pleasantness condition as compared to the word-length rating task, replicating the
traditional levels-of-processing effect (Craik and Lockhart, 1972). Importantly, survival
processing produced the best memory performance. In their second experiment, the
survival scenario was compared to two other forms of schematic processing: an "overnight"
and a "forgotten" scenario. In the first, participants were asked to rate the relevance of
words to packing a bag to go spend the night at a friend's house. In the second, participants
rated the relevance of words to a situation where they had been forgotten by their parents at
school/kindergarten; they were also asked to imagine being hungry, thirsty, and a bit
scared. Once again, a strong survival advantage was obtained in a recognition task across
all age groups.
It is important to note, however, that none of these studies have used a free-recall
test of unrelated words, as is frequently the case in the survival processing experiments.
Given that children's memory performance is often sensitive to both the type of material
and the nature of the memory test (e.g., Lindberg, 1980; Pressley, 1982), testing the
survival processing effect under these conditions would be an important addition to the
establishment of this phenomenon in children. Previous studies with adults using
semantically related lists of items have revealed somewhat conflicting findings. Using a
semantically related list of items, Nairne and Pandeirada (2008a) obtained a correct recall
advantage after survival processing, but also an increase in false recall, even though the
number of intrusions overall was very low (Nairne and Pandeirada, 2008a, Experiment 1);
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -406-
a similar pattern was found in Experiments 1 and 3 of Otgaar and Smeets (2010). However,
in Burns et al. (2011, Experiment 2), correct recall of categorized lists of items was similar
after survival processing and a pleasantness rating task (no intrusion data were presented in
this work). These mixed results when categorized/theme-related lists of items are used is
presumably due to the semantically related nature of the material, which can affect the
extent to which the information is processed for the respective encoding condition. For
example, participants might become aware of the semantic structure or common theme of
the material during encoding, which could distract them from the specific encoding task.
Also, by realizing the semantic structure or common theme of the material, later on,
participants can rely on it as a recall strategy (e.g., "I remember there were fruits,
animals..."), thus limiting the influence of the encoding task on final performance.
The current study was designed to explore the survival processing effect in children
using unrelated word lists and free recall as the main memory measure. Our study also
included a control condition that differs to some extent from the controls used in the
previous studies in children. We used a moving scenario (see Nairne et al., 2007), as did
Otgaar and Smeets (2010), but the tasks involved in the two scenarios were different: In our
case, children were asked to rate the relevance of the words to "organizing and storing all
your toys such that none will get broken nor lost during the moving process to the new
home" and, in their scenario, children were asked to rate the relevance of words to making
new friends and learning a new language in the context of moving to a foreign land with
their parents. We believe the tasks involved in our scenario are more familiar and self-
relevant to our participants, thus providing another demonstration of the effect in a
somewhat different context. The current study was also conducted in Portugal, a different
culture from the ones used in previous studies (which included children from Germany and
the Netherlands). Demonstrating that the effect occurs across a wide variety of cultures,
and thus, is potentially universal, strengthens the idea that this memory tuning might indeed
result from our evolutionary history (Tooby and Cosmides, 2005).
In sum, establishing a mnemonic bias towards fitness-relevant encodings in children
helps to bolster the proposal that memory continues to bear the "imprint" of ancestral
selection pressures. It is highly unlikely that children as young as 4 years old have
experienced the fitness-relevant challenges depicted in the survival scenario. However,
even if one rejects the evolutionary account, it is still interesting to consider the effects of
fitness-based processing in the context of the development of memory (Howe and Otgaar,
2013). Finally, the merits of systematic replication are nowadays widely recognized as
essential to strengthen the reliability of a phenomenon (e.g., Roediger, 2012).
In the present study, 40 Portuguese children aged between 10 and 12 years rated a
set of unrelated nouns to a survival and a moving scenario. At the end of the task, a surprise
free-recall task was administered. We expected memory performance to be better when
words were rated for survival than when they were rated for moving.
Methods
Participants and apparatus
Forty Portuguese children aged 10 to 12 years (20 females) attending a school in
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -407-
Estarreja (town in the district of Aveiro, Portugal) participated in this experiment. Consent
to conduct the study at the school was obtained from the school's Principal. Informed
consent was also obtained from the parents of each child and, at the beginning of the
experimental session, informed consent was also obtained from the child. Sessions were
conducted individually in a quiet room and lasted approximately 40 minutes. Stimuli were
presented and controlled using E-prime 2.0 software (Schneider, Eschman, and Zuccolotto,
2002) and a 17" monitor laptop.
Materials and design
Thirty-two unrelated concrete and familiar nouns were used (plus six practice items;
see the Appendix for the full list of items in European Portuguese and corresponding
translation to English). Words were randomly divided into four sets of eight words each.
Each participant rated two sets of words for the Survival (S) scenario and the other two for
the Moving (M) scenario in an alternated form (within-subject design). Thus, half the
participants performed the encoding task in the order SMSM and the other half in the order
MSMS. The same randomly determined order of presentation of the words was kept
constant across versions. An unrelated visual search task was performed for about 3
minutes between each encoding block (these results will not be presented here as they are
not relevant to the memory task). This task also served as a distractor task after the last
encoding block and before the surprise free recall task.
Procedure
The experiment was conducted in a quiet room at the participant's school, isolated
from potentially distracting elements (e.g., noise). Upon arrival in the room, participants
were randomly assigned to one of the counterbalancing versions of the experiment. The
initial instruction informed participants they would be rating the relevance of words to two
different scenarios using the same 1 to 5 rating scale. The first scenario was then presented;
the survival scenario was very similar to the one used by Nairne et al. (2007), but the
moving scenario was slightly adjusted to describe a more appropriate and self-relevant set
of tasks considering the age of our participants. The specific scenarios were as follows
(European Portuguese versions were used):
Survival instructions: Imagine you are lost in a forest of an unknown place without
any basic survival materials. Over the next few months you will need to find ways to
survive, such as finding food, water, protection from dangerous animals, and finding a
shelter. Next, I'm going to show you a list of words. Please rate how relevant each of these
words would be for the survival situation just described. Some words might be important
and others not, it's up to you to decide.
Moving instructions: Imagine your parents are planning to move to a new home and
you do not want to leave any of your toys behind. During the next few months you will
have to find a way of organizing and storing all your toys such that none will get broken
nor lost during the moving process to the new home. Next, I'm going to show you a list of
words. Please rate how relevant each of these words would be for the moving situation just
described. Some words might be important and others not, it's up to you to decide.
At the beginning of the first and second blocks of the encoding task, participants
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -408-
received the scenario instructions followed by three practice trials. After practice,
participants were reminded of the scenario and then continued to the set of eight scored
trials. Words were presented individually on the screen for 5 seconds each (ITI among
words of 250 ms). Participants were cautioned to respond within this time window. Below
the word, the 5-point rating scale was presented along with labels for the extreme and
middle values: a value of 1 corresponded to a rating of "not relevant," a value of 3 to "more
or less relevant," and a value of 5 to "extremely relevant." The rating scale was the same in
both encoding conditions. Participants provided their responses by clicking on the number
of their choice on the keyboard. After each encoding block, participants performed an
unrelated visual search task, lasting approximately 3 minutes; this task served as a
distractor task. After the fourth encoding block and the distractor task, the surprise free-
recall instructions appeared, instructing participants to recall as many items as they could in
any order they wished during a 5-minute period. Responses were written in a sheet of paper
by the participant. A minute countdown was shown on the computer screen during the
recall task.
Results
The level of statistical significance was set at p < .05. Participants rated over 98%
of the words in both conditions [F(1, 39) < 1], indicating that participants had no difficulty
rating the words within the available time. Given the small amount of non-rated items and
to avoid item-selection concerns, we present the data unconditionalized.
The proportion of correct recall for each condition presented in Figure 1 reveals that
participants recalled more survival-encoded words than moving-encoded words. A repeated
measures ANOVA confirmed this reliable difference, F(1, 39) = 7.23, MSE = .020, p
2 =
.16. Given the within-subject nature of the design, no separate intrusion data can be
presented by condition. Overall, the number of intrusions was very low averaging less than
1 intrusion per participant.
Figure 1. Proportion correct recall for each condition
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
Survival Moving
Proportion Correct Recall
Note: Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -409-
It is also important to consider the relevance ratings provided during encoding,
given the debate on the role congruity might play in the survival mnemonic advantage (e.g.,
Nairne and Pandeirada, 2011). Participants rated the words as significantly more relevant to
the survival scenario than to the moving scenario, F(1,39) = 8.87, MSE = .12, p
2= .19. The
specific rating values obtained in each condition are presented in Table 1. In order to rule
out this variable as a potential mediator of the survival advantage, additional analyses were
performed. First, the difference in rating between the two conditions was calculated for
each participant; two groups were then created based on this difference: a group of
participants with a rating difference smaller or equal to |.5| (similar ratings group; n = 26),
and a group with survival ratings higher than .5 as compared to the moving ratings (higher
survival ratings group; n = 13); only one participant rated the words as more relevant to the
moving scenario than to the survival scenario. The descriptive data for the ratings and
recall by group are presented in Table 2. A mixed ANOVA with condition as a within-
subject variable and group (similar ratings group and higher survival ratings group) as a
between-subjects variable revealed a significant main effect of condition, F(1, 37) = 6.65,
MSE = .02, p
2 = .15, but neither the main effect of group, nor the interaction, were
significant, F(1, 37) = 1.51, MSE = .02, p
2 = .039, and F(1, 37) = .044, MSE = .02, p
2 =
.001, respectively. Importantly, even if only the group with similar ratings is considered,
despite the smaller sample size, the survival mnemonic advantage remains significant, F(1,
25) = 4.60, MSE = .02, p
2 = .16. Additionally, considering all participants, the correlation
between rating and recall for each condition was non-significant for both scenarios, and
was actually negative for survival (survival: r = -.10, p = 0.50; moving: r = .19, p = .24).
These results make it unlikely that the survival mnemonic advantage can be explained by
differences in the relevance ratings.
Table 1. Average rating and response times, in milliseconds (and standard deviations), for
each condition
Survival Moving
Rating 2.7 (.63) 2.5 (.59)
Response Time 2318.7 (360.5) 2249.7 (424.1)
Table 2. Average ratings and proportion correct recall (and standard deviations) for the
similar ratings group and higher survival ratings group, for each condition
Survival Moving
Rating
Similar ratings group 2.53 (0.60) 2.53 (0.60)
Higher survival ratings 3.06 (0.55) 2.28 (0.53)
Recall
Similar ratings group 45% (0.12) 37% (0.14)
Higher survival ratings 42% (0.14) 32% (0.18)
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -410-
Finally, we considered the time participants took to rate the words during the initial
encoding task, as it might indicate differences in difficulty to make a decision. The
response time data for each condition (see Table 1) indicate that participants took slightly
more time to provide their ratings for the survival scenario than for the moving scenario.
However, the difference was not statistically significant, F(1, 39) = 3.01, MSE = 31629.0,
p = .09, p
2 = .07.
Discussion
The present experiment reveals that children's memory performance is sensitive to
the processing of information in the fitness-relevant context of survival. Aslan and Bäuml
(2012) previously reported this same conclusion. However, Otgaar and Smeets (2010)
questioned this conclusion based on the fact that survival processing not only increased
correct recall but also false recall when theme-related lists of items were used. In the
current study, we revisited this question while also extending the survival phenomenon in
children using a new procedure (a free-recall test of unrelated material) and a new control
scenario (a moving scenario that implicated different activities than the one used by Otgaar
and Smeets, 2010). The test of the survival processing effect in children under new
procedural conditions is important, as children's memory is often sensitive to procedural
changes, as noted in the introduction. This study also expands the demonstration of a
mnemonic advantage to a fitness-relevant context in children of a different culture,
providing some support for an evolutionarily-based account of this phenomenon.
Additionally, the critical importance of replication is well recognized in psychology, and
researchers have been strongly encouraged to replicate previously published findings (e.g.,
Roediger, 2012). As Pappas and Friedman (2012) put it: "Without replicability, cumulative
knowledge, which is the essence of science, is not possible" (p. 364). Given the novelty of
this finding in children and the existence of only three experiments published, we believe
the present systematic replication adds reliability to this phenomenon.
From an evolutionary perspective, one can anticipate that humans faced strong
selection pressures from a very young age (e.g., Bjorklund and Sellers, 2011). Thus, one
would expect our cognitive systems, and in particular memory, to be sensitive to elements
that might somehow affect the chances of survival from an early age. The present study
adds to the growing body of evidence for survival-based mnemonic tunings in children
when different memory tests and materials are used, as well as in comparison to a variety
of control conditions. Furthermore, the demonstration of the effect in a new cultural context
also supports the idea of an evolutionarily-driven memory bias (Tooby and Cosmides,
2005). Still, some would argue that this phenomenon is relevant more from a
developmental perspective than an evolutionary one; specifically, experiments of this type
provide information about the mnemonic strategies that arise during development. Howe
and Otgaar (2013) have suggested that the survival processing effect is driven by general
mechanisms, ones that are developmentally invariant, and demonstrations of the effect in
children simply reflect the usage of those mechanisms. One example is the involvement of
both item-specific and relational strategies. Although these authors argue that these
strategies arise very early in development, others have shown that they are typically
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -411-
acquired around the age of 5-6 years (e.g., Murphy, McKone, and Slee, 2003). Another
example is the use of elaboration--some researchers would question whether elaborative
strategies are naturally present in children as young as 4 (e.g., Bjorklund, Dukes, and
Brown, 2009; Pressley, 1982). Thus, in our view, the demonstration of survival processing
advantages in children as young as 4 (Aslan and Bäuml, 2012) lowers the chances that such
proximate mechanisms can explain the effect, at least in children.
Furthermore, such mechanisms (e.g., elaborative processing) also fail to provide a
general explanation of the survival processing advantages in young adults. Studies that
have failed to obtain the survival processing effect using implicit memory tests provide
evidence that the effect is not solely mediated by elaboration or distinctiveness, as these
processes usually confer mnemonic advantages in implicit as well as in explicit memory
(McBride, Thomas, and Zimmerman, 2013; Tse and Altarriba, 2010). Emotionality could
also be considered a potential proximate mechanism of the survival processing effect (see
Sellers and Bjorklund, in press, for a discussion of this possibility). However, emotionality
effects are also usually observed in implicit memory (Kensinger and Schacter, 2008), and
that seems not to be the case with the survival processing effect, at least with young adults.
As Howe and Otgaar (2013) acknowledge, survival processing seems to "recruit(s)
a powerful set of memory processes"; the ultimate question is: Why does this happen? Why
does processing information in this fitness-relevant scenario naturally recruit such powerful
mnemonic processes? As Nairne and Pandeirada (2010) note, the survival processing
paradigm was developed to test an a priori prediction of an evolutionary account, not to
determine the proximate mechanisms that underlie the effect. This same question guided
the current study: Could a mnemonic tuning be systematically identified early in
development? From an evolutionary perspective, one that acknowledges the relevance of
survival to children, we predicted that survival processing advantages would extend to
younger populations of participants, regardless of the proximate mechanisms that may
underlie the effect.
The functional / evolutionary approach that led to the development of the survival
processing paradigm has been extended beyond the survival scenario, focusing instead on
the fitness-relevance of the situation or context engendered by the encoding condition (e.g.,
Nairne, Pandeirada, Gregory, and Van Arsdall, 2009). It has also been applied to the
investigation of other forms of memory. For example, it has been shown that the spatial
location of items (pictures) is best retained when it is processed in a fitness-relevant context
(e.g., having to collect food items or capture animals in order to survive), as compared to a
non-fitness relevant context (e.g., the same tasks were involved but now in the context of a
game) (Nairne, VanArsdall, Pandeirada, and Blunt, 2012).
Other fitness-relevant aspects, such as animacy, have also been shown to affect our
cognitive processes. One example is the visual attention priority to animate motion (Pratt,
Radulescu, Guo, and Abrams, 2010). Another one, using young adults, is an increased
retention of items processed as animates, or of animate items, as compared to inanimate
items. In the first case, memory for nonwords encoded as animates was better than when
these were encoded as inanimates (VanArsdall, Nairne, Pandeirada, and Blunt, 2012). In
the second case, a set of animate items was recalled better than a set of carefully matched
inanimate items (Nairne, VanArsdall, Pandeirada, Cogdill, and LeBreton, 2013). This
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -412-
mnemonic tuning is consistent with the predisposition children have to acquire knowledge
related to this dimension and also to the living / non-living aspect of objects (e.g., Gelman,
1990; Newman et al., 2010; Pratt et al., 2010). Therefore, a strong case for the adaptive
nature of memory has been developing over the last few years, suggesting that the way our
cognitive systems work (and particularly memory) is sensitive to conditions that affect the
individuals' chances of survival and/ or reproduction. Employing the functional and
evolutionary reasoning to investigate these cognitive processes can indeed be a fruitful
avenue, as it can promote the discovery of new phenomena (e.g., Nairne and Pandeirada,
2008b, 2010).
Recognizing the potential effects of evolution in children has motivated the
development of new theoretical areas that specifically explore the connections between
evolutionary theory and human development--evolutionary developmental psychology is
such an example (e.g., Bjorklund and Sellers, in press; King and Bjorklund, 2010).
Furthermore, researchers aim to make the best usage of evolutionary theory in specific
contexts to provide the most successful developmental and learning experiences to
children. For example, evolutionary educational psychology seeks to use children's biases
acquired throughout the evolutionary process in learning and motivation to develop cultural
and educational environments that will maximize academic performance (e.g., Geary,
2008, 2010). In the same vein, exploring the conditions in which memory performance can
be optimized is also of potential practical importance, namely in educational settings.
Given the results so far, we believe the functional and evolutionary approach to human
memory is leading to the discovery of new effective memory strategies.
Acknowledgements: We thank James S. Nairne for very helpful comments on the
manuscript. This research was partly conducted by Luisa Pires in order to obtain her Master
degree. Josefa N. S. Pandeirada was, in part, supported by the fellowships from the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology SFRH/BPD/21534/2005 and
SFRH/BPD/81438/2011.
Received 20 March 2013; Revision submitted 24 May 2013; Accepted 21 July 2013
References
Aslan, A., and Bäuml, K. H. T. (2012). Adaptive memory: Young children show enhanced
retention of fitness-related information. Cognition, 122, 118-122.
Bjorklund, D. F., Dukes, C., and Brown, R. D. (2009). The development of memory
strategies. In M. Courage and N. Cowan (Eds.), The development of memory in
infancy and childhood (pp. 145-175). New York: Psychology Press.
Bjorklund, D. F., and Pellegrini, A. D. (2000). Child development and evolutionary
psychology. Child Development, 71, 1687-1708.
Bjorklund, D. F., and Sellers, P. D. (2011). The evolved child: Adapted to family life
Applied evolutionary psychology (pp. 55-77). New York: Oxford University Press.
Bjorklund, D. F., and Sellers, P. D. (2014). Memory development in evolutionary
perspective. In P. Bauer and R. Fivush (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook on
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -413-
the development of children's memory (pp. 126-150). New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bröder, A., Krüger, N., and Schütte, S. (2011). The survival processing memory effect
should generalise to source memory, but it doesn't. Psychology, 2, 896-901.
Burns, D. J., Burns, S. A., and Hwang, A. J. (2011). Adaptive memory: Determining the
proximate mechanisms responsible for the memorial advantages of survival
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 206-218.
Craik, F. I. M., and Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory
research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species. London: John Murray.
Faria, A. L., Pinho, M. S., Gonçalves, M. T., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2009). Adaptive
memory: The survival processing advantage in mild cognitive impairment.
Psicologia Educação Cultura, XIII, 197-214.
Geary, D. C. (2008). An evolutionarily informed education science. Educational
Psychologist, 43, 179-195.
Geary, D. C. (2010). Evolution and education. Psicothema, 22, 35-40.
Gelman, R. (1990). First principles organize attention to and learning about relevant data:
Number and the animate-inanimate distinction as examples. Cognitive Science, 14,
79-106.
Howe, M. L., and Otgaar, H. (2013). Proximate mechanisms and the development of
adaptive memory. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 16-22.
Kang, S. H. K., McDermott, K. B., and Cohen, S. M. (2008). The mnemonic advantage of
processing fitness-relevant information. Memory and Cognition, 36, 1151-1156.
Kensinger, E. A., and Schacter, D. L. (2008). Memory and emotion. In M. Lewis, J. M.
Haviland-Jones, and L. F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (3rd ed.) (pp. 601-
617). New York: The Guilford Press.
King, A. C., and Bjorklund, D. (2010). Evolutionary developmental psychology.
Psicothema, 22, 22-27.
Kinzler, K. D., and Shutts, K. (2008). Memory for "mean" over "nice": The influence of
threat on children's face memory. Cognition, 107, 775-783.
Lindberg, M. A. (1980). Is knowledge base development a necessary and sufficient
condition for memory development? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 30,
401-410.
LoBue, V., and DeLoache, J. S. (2008). Detecting the snake in the grass. Psychological
Science, 19, 284-289.
LoBue, V., and DeLoache, J. S. (2010). Superior detection of threat-relevant stimuli in
infancy. Developmental Science, 13, 221-228.
McBride, D., Thomas, B., and Zimmerman, C. (2013). A test of the survival processing
advantage in implicit and explicit memory tests. Memory and Cognition, 41, 1-10.
Murphy, K., McKone, E., and Slee, J. (2003). Dissociations between implicit and explicit
memory in children: The role of strategic processing and the knowledge base.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 84, 124-165.
Nairne, J. S., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2008a). Adaptive memory: Is survival processing
special? Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 377-385.
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -414-
Nairne, J. S., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2008b). Adaptive memory: Remembering with a
stone-age brain. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 239-243.
Nairne, J. S., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2010). Adaptive memory: Nature's criterion and the
functionalist agenda. The American journal of psychology, 123, 381-390.
Nairne, J. S., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2011). Congruity effects in the survival processing
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
37, 539-549.
Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S., Gregory, K. J., and Van Arsdall, J. E. (2009). Adaptive
memory: Fitness-relevance and the hunter-gatherer mind. Psychological Science,
20, 740-746.
Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S., and Thompson, S. R. (2008). Adaptive memory: The
comparative value of survival processing. Psychological Science, 19, 176-180.
Nairne, J. S., Thompson, S. R., and Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2007). Adaptive memory:
Survival processing enhances retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 263-273.
Nairne, J. S., VanArsdall, J. E., Pandeirada, J. N. S., and Blunt, J. R. (2012). Adaptive
memory: Enhanced location memory after survival processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 495-501.
Nairne, J. S., VanArsdall, J. E., Pandeirada, J. N. S., Cogdill, M., and LeBreton, J. M.
(2013). Adaptive memory: The mnemonic value of animacy. Psychological
Science, 24, 2099-2105.
Newman, G. E., Keil, F. C., Kuhlmeier, V. A., and Wynn, K. (2010). Early understandings
of the link between agents and order. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107, 17140-17145.
Nouchi, R. U. I. (2011). The effect of aging on the memory enhancement of the survival
judgment task. Japanese Psychological Research, 54, 210-217.
Otgaar, H., and Smeets, T. (2010). Adaptive memory: Survival processing increases both
true and false memory in adults and children. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36, 1010-1016.
Otgaar, H., Smeets, T., and van Bergen, S. (2010). Picturing survival memories: Enhanced
memory after fitness-relevant processing occurs for verbal and visual stimuli.
Memory and Cognition, 38, 23-28.
Pandeirada, J. N. S., Pinho, M. S., and Faria, A. L. (2014). The mark of adaptive memory
in healthy and cognitively impaired older adults and elderly. Japanese
Psychological Research. doi:10.1111/jpr.12040
Pappas, J. D., and Friedman, H. L. (2012). The importance of replication: Comparing the
self-expansiveness level form transpersonal scale with an alternate graphical
measure. The Humanistic Psychologist, 40, 364-379.
Pratt, J., Radulescu, P. V., Guo, R. M., and Abrams, R. A. (2010). It's alive! Psychological
Science, 21, 1724-1730.
Pressley, M. (1982). Elaboration and memory development. Child Development, 53, 296-
309.
Roediger, H. L. (2012). Psychology's woes and a partial cure: The value of replication.
APS Observer, 25.
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -415-
Roediger, H. L., and McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering
words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., and Zuccolotto, A. (2002). E-Prime user's guide. Pittsburgh,
PA: Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Sellers, P. D., and Bjorklund, D. F. (in press). The development of adaptive memory. In B.
L. Schwartz, M. L. Howe, M. P. Toglia and H. Otgaar (Eds.), What's adaptive
about adaptive memory? New York: Oxford University Press.
Shin, H., Bjorklund, D. F., and Beck, E. F. (2007). The adaptive nature of children's
overestimation in a strategic memory task. Cognitive Development, 22, 197-212.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of culture. In J. H.
Barkow, L. Cosmides and J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 19-136). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Tooby, J., and Cosmides, L. (2005). Conceptual foundations of evolutionary psychology.
In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 5-67).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Tse, C.-S., and Altarriba, J. (2010). Does survival processing enhance implicit memory?
Memory and Cognition, 38, 1110-1121.
VanArsdall, J. E., Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S., and Blunt, J. R. (2012). Adaptive
memory: Animacy processing produces mnemonic advantages. Experimental
Psychology, 60, 1-7.
Revisiting the survival mnemonic effect in children
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 12(2). 2014. -416-
Appendix
Words used in the experiment in European Portuguese, and corresponding translation to
English (presented in alphabetical order)
European Portuguese English
águia eagle
apartamento apartment
atum tuna
bola ball
cadeira chair
caixa box
camião truck
carro car
chocolate chocolate
couves cabbage
espada sword
flauta flute
futebol football
gasóleo diesel
igreja church
lápis pencil
laranja orange
lençol sheet
livro book
mão hand
martelo hammer
meia sock
montanha mountain
neve snow
porta door
puzzle puzzle
rio river
saco bag
sapatos shoes
sumo juice
tia aunt
urso bear
