SAGE Open
July-September 2013: 1
­9
© The Author(s) 2013
DOI: 10.1177/2158244013497025
sgo.sagepub.com
Article
This article presents evidence that graduate students enrolled
in special education teacher preparation classes that offer a
situated learning experience through a community partner-
ship believe they are more responsible for their own learn-
ing and more proficient in their teaching skills compared
with the training they received in a more traditional college
course. Based on research by Utley (2006), teacher prepara-
tion programs need to focus more on teaching students to
apply their skills in real-world contexts. Similar studies by
Contu and Willmott (2003) emphasize that students who
learn within an organization are better able to integrate and
transfer skills and knowledge into that setting. They also
found that acquiring and fine-tuning skills in the natural
environment make good sense and are more easily inte-
grated into students' social and cultural frame of reference.
The researchers in the present study examined the effects
of using the situated learning model of instruction through
a community partnership based on the hypothesis that the
graduate students would benefit further than if instruction
was offered in a traditional course presentation. The course,
which focused on individuals with moderate and severe dis-
abilities, was taught in an off-campus setting that provided
services for individuals with developmental disabilities,
known as The Arc, formally The Association of Retarded
Citizens. The Arc services individuals with developmental
disabilities from birth to adulthood. A full professional staff
works with clients in procuring recreation, counseling for
the client and family, summer programs, housing, and
employment. Clients attend daily and evening events held
at The Arc building as well as social events coordinated by
The Arc staff. One of the weekly experiences for the clients
was their participation with the college students in this
study.
The graduate students worked individually or in small
groups with children and adults who had developmental
disabilities that ranged from cognitive impairment to
physical and behavioral disabilities. At the conclusion of
the course, the students completed a written questionnaire
and participated in focus groups where the facilitator pre-
sented questions about the situated learning experience
and asked students to reflect on their personal growth in
skills and knowledge. The results of the study confirm
based on the graduate students' responses to the survey
and focus group questions that the situated learning model
497025
SGOXXX10.1177/2158244013497025SAGE OpenMeyers and Lester
research-article2013
1The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, NJ, USA
Corresponding Author:
Shelly Meyers, The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, 101 Vera
King Farris Drive, Galloway, NJ 08205, USA.
Email: shelly.meyers@stockton.edu
The Effects of Situated Learning Through
a Community Partnership in a Teacher
Preparation Program
Shelly Meyers1 and David Lester1
Abstract
This article examines the value of using an alternative approach to college course instruction in an off-campus location, an
agency for individuals with developmental disabilities. The situated learning model is an alternative to the traditional college
course instructional approach for preservice teachers. This model immerses students in the actual setting where they can
practice the skills and apply the concepts emphasized in the curriculum. Through a partnership between the college, the
community agency, and a public school, graduate students in the special education program developed and implemented a
life-skills curriculum for individuals with developmental disabilities, at the same time learning essential principles of delivering
instruction. The school-aged students who participated in the study were from a racially mixed urban school district, while
the adult clients from the community agency attended the program at the end of their community-based workday. Based
on the results of surveys and focus group discussions, participants in the study indicated that the situated learning model of
instruction in a community setting better prepared them in the acquisition and application of their teaching skills, and built
their competence in developing educational programs for individuals with disabilities.
Keywords
community partnerships, situated learning, preservice teachers, life skills
2 SAGE Open
in a community setting was more effective in their acqui-
sition of content and pedagogy than if the course was
offered in a traditional format of lecture and discussion.
The study also provided an instructional process that can
be easily replicated in other college-level teacher prepara-
tion courses.
Review of the Literature
Situated Learning
These days, institutions of higher education are challenged
by the issues of accountability and demonstration that their
students are able to apply what they learned in real-world
practice (Gardiner, Corbitt, & Adams, 2010). Typical college
classes engage students in acquiring knowledge with little
relevance to their own experiences (Donham, Heinrich, &
Bostwick, 2010). Teacher preparation programs that focus on
lectures, discussion, and demonstration would be enhanced
by incorporating authentic hands-on activities. The situated
learning instructional model brings the students to the expe-
rience through a connection of improved teaching that leads
to improved learning (Utley, 2006).
Lunce (2006) defined situated learning as an approach to
instruction whereby students use the process of learning
through real-life environments, engaging in practical imple-
mentation of the course content. The model also emphasizes
21st century skills such as collaboration, team work, leader-
ship, reflection, critical thinking, and authentic application of
concepts (Meyers, in press). Providing students with oppor-
tunities for community engagement in the field allows stu-
dents to discover methods of instruction on their own and to
integrate and apply knowledge into the realistic context,
while facilitating the relationship between teaching and
learning (Nicotera, Cutforth, Fretz, & Summers Thompson,
2011). For adult learners, especially those at the graduate
level, they are most successful when given opportunities to
apply their knowledge to actual situations (Canipe & Decker,
2004). Situated learning is an on-the-job training with invalu-
able benefits for students in a teacher preparation program
(Akiba & Alkins, 2010).
Contu and Willmott (2003) studied the ways in which
situated learning strengthens students' abilities to fine-tune
their skills as they practice within the organizational context
that they planned to enter after their education. Researchers
found that when students'learning was embedded in the con-
text itself, it was more meaningful, and was valued more
highly in the workplace and the community (Miraglia &
Smilan, 2009). The special education graduate students
learned to apply specific learning through authentic hands-
on activities as they collaborated with peers and reflected on
their own teaching practice. They applied specific learning
strategies to teaching school-aged and adult clients with
developmental disabilities, while designing and implement-
ing life-skills curricular units.
Community Partnerships
In addition to situated learning, researchers have found that
the partnership between different organizations, as in this
case an urban public school, a community agency, and a col-
lege, further enhanced the value of the participants' experi-
ences (Butcher, Bezzina & Moran, 2011). McNall, Reed,
Brown, and Allen (2009) saw the community partnerships
with students in higher education as providing opportunities
for them to engage in scholarship and collaboration, which
often is lacking in a more traditional approach to instruction.
They also found that the results of the partnering relationship
proved to be long-term in its effects and were sustained after
the particular course ended.
While the public perception of colleges involved in com-
munity partnerships is positive, many faculty members are
resistant to include work with outside agencies in their course
design (Fitzgerald, 2012). This reluctance on the part of fac-
ulty is attributed to their lack of specific understanding about
what a partnership entails and fears that they will not have
support of the college as a whole with the partnership initia-
tive (Selkrig & Keamy, 2009). For a successful partnership
to occur, all parties must work together to develop common
goals so that all parties benefit and realize an advantage from
the association of the organizations (Butcher et al., 2011).
Faculty
Based on the research by Knotts, Henderson, Davidson, and
Swain (2009), the faculty's instructional styles of those who
use situated learning most effectively are described as facili-
tators of knowledge rather than givers of information to stu-
dents. Faculty must be willing to relinquish the more
dominant role in the classroom for a more collaborative
approach to teaching and learning. Engagement in commu-
nity partnerships also excites faculty because they, along
with their students, immerse themselves in the collaborative
efforts of designing and implementing programs where they
see immediate results as they work with their clients (Meyers,
in press). Furthermore, any change in current practice, such
as using situated learning in a community setting for gradu-
ate-level courses, requires faculty to articulate the rationale,
course structure, and delivery, and develop goals that are pre-
sented to the college administration for approval (Harris,
Jones, & Coutts, 2010).
The aim of this study was to measure the effectiveness of
a situated learning model of instruction in an off-campus
location, involving a partnership between a college and com-
munity agency. This approach was used as an alternative to a
more traditional classroom model for course content presen-
tation, which was primarily lecture and discussion. Special
education graduate-level students provided the data for the
study by responding to written surveys and focus group
questions. The agency that provided services to individuals
with developmental disabilities presented opportunities for
Meyers and Lester 3
hands-on activities, whereby graduate students helped indi-
viduals with disabilities to learn skills they could transfer to
their own natural environments (Herrington, Reeves, &
Oliver, 2006; Mastro, Jalloh, & Watson, 2006; Wolfe, Van
Eijck, Pei-Ling, Marshall, & Mazumder, 2009). The gradu-
ate students took the skills that they learned back to their
classrooms, and those with disabilities to the settings in
which they live and work (Trigwell & Ashwin, 2006).
Method
Participants
A total of 29 graduate-level students in traditional courses
and 55 students in courses at The Arc comprised the two
groups of students who participated in this study. The stu-
dents were mainly women (83%), and their mean age was
33.4 years (SD = 9.2), with a mean number of years of teach-
ing, M = 3.3 (SD = 3.2).
The 18 school-aged student clients who participated in the
study were from an urban, racially mixed public school dis-
trict, and they attended the program at the end of their regular
school day. They were in Grades 1 through 6, ages 7 through
12 years. In all, 14 of the 18 students were African American,
and 4 were Latino. The 21 adult clients had a range of devel-
opmental disabilities and attended the program after their
community-based work experiences. Their ages ranged from
28 years to 55 years, and 15 of the clients were Caucasian
and six were African American. The Arc adult clients lived in
supported group homes, and 13 of them held jobs in the com-
munity. In total, 8 of the clients spent their days at home or in
adult recreational centers.
Program Design
College special education faculty approached a local school
administrator with a proposal whereby they would provide
the teachers in the district with strategies to teach life skills.
The response from the administrator was positive, but the
question of time was an issue. Using time after school was
suggested, but there were no funds to pay teachers to extend
their school day. The college faculty thought of alternatives
and considered teaching a special education graduate course
at a site off-campus held after school hours that included
teaching life skills to students with disabilities as part of the
course objectives.
The Arc, a nonprofit organization for individuals with
developmental disabilities, was contacted and agreed to allow
the faculty to use the facility for the graduate special educa-
tion course. In addition, The Arc personnel recruited their
adult clients who had developmental disabilities for the pro-
gram.Apartnership with TheArc was ideal for the implemen-
tation of situated learning to teach life skills. TheArc provides
comprehensive services for individuals with moderate and
severe developmental disabilities, and their families in the
areas of housing, recreation, counseling, community partici-
pation, employment, health care, and education. Their adult
clients, who attend the program, as well as the school-aged
students from the public school district, receive one-on-one
assistance with a variety of life skills taught by special educa-
tion graduate students. The public school administrator
arranged transportation for the school students to travel to and
from The Arc, while The Arc's clients used transportation
provided by their case managers or the county transportation
access system.
The adult clients came to the program with individual
person-centered plans that included goals, and in addition,
the graduate students interviewed the clients and found there
were additional areas that were of interest to them. For exam-
ple, many of the clients wanted to improve their reading and
math skills, and the school-aged students had similar goals.
As the weekly sessions progressed, the graduate students
worked with the adults and young students on their specific
goals and designed appropriate lessons. Throughout the
experience, the graduate students took responsibility for their
own learning as they engaged in the teaching and learning
process (Donham et al., 2010; Trigwell & Ashwin, 2006).
They participated in group and individual reflective activi-
ties after each class session to identify the strengths and
weaknesses of past lessons as they worked together to
improve future lessons.
The graduate students were enrolled in the course, Survey
of Moderate and Severe Disabilities, which is a requirement
for a state special education teaching certificate. The stu-
dents were responsible for designing life-skills units for the
children and adult clients with developmental disabilities.
The students worked in groups of four or five and together
focused on a three-pronged process: (a) assess the aptitudes
and interests of the children and adult clients in their charge,
(b) create life-skills activities based on the aptitudes and
interests, and (c) determine whether the clients acquired the
skills after instruction. Based on the clients'progress on each
unit, the graduate students designed further instructional
plans for different life-skills topics. As the graduate students
became more familiar with their clients, they incorporated
differentiated strategies to address their needs.
The course format differed from the traditional class in
several ways, whereas the content was similar. Students in
the traditionally designed course met on campus and received
direct instruction through lecture and PowerPoint presenta-
tions for the 1st hour of the class session. Then, they worked
in small groups analyzing case studies and problem-solving
exercises that were provided by the instructor. The instructor
used videos and invited guest speakers to the class on a fre-
quent basis to relay to students their own experiences having
children with disabilities, or personnel from community
agencies described their work with children and adults with
disabilities. Assignments for the course were the same as in
the situated learning class, which were take-home essay mid-
term and final exams, assigned supplemental readings, and
4 SAGE Open
the development of a life-skills unit of study. An additional
requirement for the situated learning class was a weekly
reflection of the hands-on experiences at the Arc.
The class sessions at The Arc began with an hour of
course content review. Students met at The Arc and engaged
in discussion of the required text and supplemental readings
that focused on the definitions and characteristics, and edu-
cational, instructional, vocational, and social/emotional chal-
lenges of individuals with moderate and severe disabilities.
The school-aged students and adult clients arrived for the
remainder of the class period, and the graduate students then
gathered in small groups and taught life skills on different
topics.
Examples of life-skill units included consumer education;
community safety; social language; behaviors at home, in
school, and in the community; nutrition; and healthy habits.
Within each unit, the graduate students planned a theme and
developed a scope and sequence of objectives for the content
area. Using an informal preassessment tool, the graduate stu-
dents identified the individual client's prior knowledge and
frame of reference in applying the life skills. Then, the stu-
dents determined what direction their instruction would take.
The target objectives for the consumer education unit
incorporated the basics of coin identification through bud-
geting and comparative shopping. Local newspaper circu-
lars, board games, and simulated activities facilitated the
clients' participation as well as the use of assistive technol-
ogy through I-pad applications to focus on specific content.
At the end of the unit, the graduate students set up a store
and assisted the clients in purchasing items, counting
money, and calculating change, all dependent upon the cli-
ent's ability levels. Observing and interviewing the clients
was an effective way to monitor progress and modify
instructional strategies during the instruction. Some clients
required more support than others, but as the course pro-
ceeded through the weekly sessions, they became more
independent and attended the meetings on a regular basis.
The graduate students followed a similar process for all of
the life-skills units, but based on the group dynamics of
both students and clients, different implementation strate-
gies and resources were used.
Data Collection
At the end of the semester, the graduate students in the situ-
ated learning and in the traditional classroom courses were
given a survey that evaluated their reactions to their particu-
lar course. The survey used is presented in Appendix A. The
questions were answered using a 6-point scale with anchors
1 (strongly disagree) and 6 (strongly agree). The scores for
each item were compared for the traditional and experimen-
tal groups using t-tests (with two-tailed significance levels)
using SPSS Version 19.
The faculty member who was the instructor for the
courses also divided the students into focus groups to
provide more detailed feedback about the experiences of the
students. The guideline for the focus groups questions is
shown in Appendix B.
Results
Survey Responses
The instructor of the course developed the written survey
items and the focus group questions after establishing the
goals of using the situated learning model of instruction.
Teaching both the traditional and situated learning course
simultaneously enabled the instructor to fine-tune the survey
questions based on observations and different learning
approaches of the two groups of students. Students were
compared for their total overall score and for their scores for
each item. Overall, the students in The Arc course gave a
higher rating for the course than the students in the tradi-
tional course. The mean total scores (see Table 1) were 111.7
and 103.5, respectively, which is equivalent to the mean
scores per item of 5.32 and 4.93 on a 6-point scale, a statisti-
cally significant difference indicating a more favorable opin-
ion about the learning for the graduate students in the situated
learning course. The students in both types of class found the
course experience to be positive and useful, but the students
in The Arc classes rated their course higher.
The students were selective in their higher ratings for The
Arc course. Significant differences were found for 9 of the
21 items of the rating scale (see Table 1), all significant at the
.02 level or better. The students in The Arc course gave that
course a higher rating for the following items:
 1. The course facilitated my skills in working as a team
member.
2. The course format sharpened my problem-solving skills.
9. I explored ideas confidently with other people.
11. The course format provided me with opportunities to
use both creative and reflective processes.
12. The course format developed my confidence to inves-
tigate new ideas.
16. The course format allowed for exploration of differ-
ent methods, approaches, and options for instruc-
tional decision making.
17. The course format provided opportunities to manipu-
late variables to realize results.
19. The course format provided opportunities to practice
multiple skills.
20. The course format provided opportunities to articulate
with colleagues about effective instructional practices.
There were no differences on the following items.
3. The course format helped sharpen my analytic skills.
4. As a result of the course format, I feel confident about
tackling unfamiliar situations.
Meyers and Lester 5
 5. The course format helped me better understand the
learning process.
 6. The course format provided me with a broad over-
view of my field of knowledge.
 7. I felt part of a group of students and staff committed
to learning.
 8. I was able to explore academic interests with staff
and students.
10. Students' ideas and suggestions were used during the
course.
13. I consider what I learned valuable for my teaching
career.
14. I learned to apply principles from this course to new
situations.
15. The format of the course provided opportunities for
more transference of learning to a real-world setting.
18. The course format facilitated the acquisition of facts
and procedures.
21. The course format was intrinsically motivating.
On none of the questions did the students in the traditional
classroom course rate the course more highly. The fact that
the situated learning graduate students were selective in their
evaluation of the course suggests that a "halo" effect was not
operating, but that the graduate students thought that the situ-
ated learning setting was better in selected areas. The main
areas on which the graduate students in the situated learning
setting focused was their increased confidence in working
with the clients and their improved problem-solving skills.
The graduate students in both types of courses felt that they
acquired knowledge and were motivated.
In particular, the experimental course seemed to have
facilitated working as a team member--and practicing mul-
tiple skills--much more than did the traditional course. (The
difference in the scores for the two groups was largest for
these two items.)
Focus Group Responses
The graduate students participated in focus groups at the end
of their participation in the program that provided informa-
tion about the effect that situated learning in a community
setting had on their own learning. The focus group questions
were designed to bring forth information and insight from
the participants that then led to unexpected discussion topics
since no definitive agenda was established (Williams,
Graham, McCary-Henderson, & Floyd, 2009). The college
faculty looked for evidence from the graduate students of
Table 1. Mean differences between scores of students in the traditional and The Arc course.
Traditional (N = 29) The arc (N = 55)
t (df = 82) 2-tailed p
 M M
 1. The course facilitated my skills in working as a team member. 4.69 5.56 4.80 <.001
2. 
The course format sharpened my problem-solving skills. 4.62 5.07 2.37 .02
3. 
The course format helped sharpen my analytic skills. 4.83 5.16 1.66 
4. 
As a result of the course format, I feel confident about tackling unfamiliar
situations.
4.79 5.15 1.72 
5. 
The course format helped me better understand the learning process. 4.72 5.11 1.71 
6. 
The course format provided me with a broad overview of my field of
knowledge.
5.03 5.02 0.07 
7. 
I felt part of a group of students and staff committed to learning. 5.14 5.51 1.71 
8. 
I was able to explore academic interests with staff and students. 5.00 5.31 1.50 
9. 
I explored ideas confidently with other people. 4.89 5.38 2.38 .02
10. 
Students' ideas and suggestions were used during the course. 5.11 5.45 1.65 
11. 
The course format provided me with opportunities to use both creative
and reflective processes.
5.04 5.51 2.63 .01
12. 
The course format developed my confidence to investigate new ideas. 4.79 5.31 2.53 .013
13. 
I consider what I learned valuable for my teaching career. 5.29 5.53 1.11 
14. 
I learned to apply principles from this course to new situations. 5.21 5.24 0.10 
15. 
The format of the course provided opportunities for more transference of
learning to a real-world setting.
5.18 5.51 1.56 
16. 
The course format allowed for exploration of different methods,
approaches, and options for instructional decision making.
4.86 5.42 2.48 .015
17. 
The course format provided opportunities to manipulate variables to
realize results.
4.50 5.16 2.98 .004
18. 
The course format facilitated the acquisition of facts and procedures. 4.96 5.04 0.36 
19. 
The course format provided opportunities to practice multiple skills. 4.46 5.20 3.57 .001
20. 
The course format provided opportunities to articulate with colleagues
about effective instructional practices.
5.04 5.64 2.87 .005
21. 
The course format was intrinsically motivating. 5.07 5.45 1.61 
Total score 103.5 111.7 2.33 .023
6 SAGE Open
their own intrinsic growth and their ability to influence the
educational environment.
Focus group facilitators began by asking the graduate stu-
dents to reflect on the hands-on learning experiences. The
graduate students reported that they felt more responsible for
their own learning and also for their fellow group members
in the collaborative processes of planning and implementing
the life-skills lessons. Most important was that students
developed a genuine bond with the school-aged students and
adult clients (Harris et al., 2010). The graduate students
believed that the situated learning experience enabled them
to apply theory to practice. They were able to modify instruc-
tion on the spot when approaches to instructional delivery
were ineffective. The young students' and adult clients'
growth was evident, based on observations and pre- and
post-test data, and an added benefit was that the young stu-
dents, adult clients, and graduate students learned from each
other in the process.
The graduate students indicated that they enjoyed oppor-
tunities to exchange ideas among themselves as well as
between groups in a comfortable, more relaxed setting,
where they found common ground for interaction, sharing,
and problem solving. Their confidence increased by working
with colleagues as they practiced multiple skills such as co-
teaching and planning, and they also engaged in dialogue
with the college faculty about the course content. An impor-
tant lesson learned by the graduate students concerned the
differences they observed between the students they encoun-
ter in public schools and The Arc adult clients. The experi-
ences they had working with adults were unlike any they had
had in the past. They were surprised that the adults were able
to make decisions and advocate for themselves. The adults
wanted to be treated with respect and dignity, and the gradu-
ate students did just that.
The graduate students spoke about how they grew from
the experiences at The Arc. They enjoyed the real-world
practice with The Arc clients that took them out of their usual
settings and comfort levels. Also, the graduate students said
they were able to see relationships between the information
read in the textbooks and the real-life experiences (Nicotera
et al., 2011).
When asked what improvements could be made to fur-
ther enhance the effectiveness of the course, the graduate
students replied that there was a need for more specific
course objectives and standards for their performance as
they completed the course requirements. They were unsure
of curriculum development and testing procedures for the
life-skills initiative, and they requested explicit guidelines
from the special education faculty. The school district would
not share information about the young students' disabilities
because of confidentiality issues, and the graduate students
believed that this hindered their abilities to meet the clients'
individual academic, social, and emotional needs. The col-
lege faculty made improvements to the program, including a
more detailed description of the course objectives
and performance standards as well as a brief overview of
curriculum development and assessment strategies. The fac-
ulty has also provided extensive information about life-
skills curricula, assessment information, and methods of
differentiating lessons.
Discussion
The graduate students were selective in their higher ratings
for The Arc course. They indicated that the situated learning
model facilitated their skills in working as team members,
helped sharpen their problem-solving skills, and provided
opportunities to practice multiple skills, and explore differ-
ent models and approaches for instructional decision mak-
ing. Both groups of graduate students (those in the situated
learning courses and those in the traditional classroom
courses) reported that they sharpened their analytic skills,
understood the learning process, explored their academic
interests with faculty and other students, and felt part of a
group that was committed to learning.
When the college faculty joined in the partnership with a
community agency for individuals with disabilities and a
public school, they sought initiatives that would improve
their teacher preparation program. Students and adults with
disabilities are included in the general population, and a
quality teacher preparation program must include course
work that emphasizes embedding life-skills instruction
within the general education curricula. The life-skills project
described in this paper proved to be an effective approach,
exposing graduate students to authentic learning, developing
their interpersonal communication skills, and engaging in
collaboration and reflection on their own learning. The
results of the current study showed that the situated learning
model of instruction enhanced the ability of the college fac-
ulty to make certain that their students acquired the skills,
knowledge, and pedagogy to teach in the inclusive class-
rooms they would soon encounter as fully certified special
education teachers.
The survey results and focus group responses from the
graduate students gave faculty reason to integrate situated
learning and community partnerships in their teacher prepa-
ration programs. Through this study, faculty found that situ-
ated learning is straightforward and easily combined with
content-area methods courses, providing opportunities for
students to learn the concepts in realistic settings. Graduate
students' feedback on the positive aspects of this model rein-
forced to faculty that their teacher preparation programs
should provide opportunities for students to engage in the
teaching-learning process by immersion in the situated learn-
ing model of instruction in an off-campus realistic setting.
Research supports the survey and focus group results in
the current study in the following areas: Situated learning
facilitates collaboration with problem solving and decision
making, it builds confidence in exploring new ideas, and the
community partnership is effective through the common
Meyers and Lester 7
goal of all agencies, which is to improve the educational
skills of their constituents. The data from the study support
that using the model will increase the likelihood that teachers
will integrate the new knowledge into their own classrooms
(Utley, 2006).
Implementing a situated learning model of instruction
differs greatly from the traditional classroom genre and,
therefore, requires that faculty adopt different teaching
strategies and methods of content presentation. As the
instructor does less direct teaching and more facilitating, the
graduate students are required to assume more responsibil-
ity for their own learning. Special education faculty must
realize that they need to alter their own teaching styles, from
giving information to encouraging peer collaboration, risk
taking, problem solving, and decision making. Faculty must
emphasize the importance of self-reflection, and through the
reflective practice, students' confidence and reliance on
their own instincts will increase (Miraglia & Smilan, 2009).
The faculty is still responsible for all students' learning and
for accomplishing the course goals. For a period of time dur-
ing each class session, the faculty in the present program
presented material, answered questions, engaged in dia-
logue, and provided feedback to students to ensure their
acquisition of course content (see Struyven, Dochy, &
Janssens, 2008).
The effective use of a community partnership with The Arc
was an essential element in the current study. This paper has
focused on the advantages realized by the graduate students,
adult clients, and school-aged students, but The Arc benefited
from the partnership as well. The graduate students brought
with them expertise in different subject area disciplines as well
as knowledge of special education theory and pedagogy.
While the graduate students worked with the school-aged and
adult clients, The Arc personnel observed the strategies and
were then able to fine-tune their own practices. The graduate
students shared life-skills lessons and strategies for presenting
information both verbally and nonverbally, and using appro-
priate social language (Tower & Broadbent, 2011).
The partnership between the college and The Arc has
lasted 3 years so far. Currently, the school-aged students are
not attending the after-school program at The Arc because of
funding issues. However, The Arc administration is dedi-
cated to funding the initiative for their adult clients in the
future. The partnership between TheArc and the college con-
tinues to generate positive outcomes for all constituents.
Adult clients with developmental disabilities learn work-
based skills that they apply to their home and work environ-
ments. The graduate students learn instructional techniques
as they teach life skills to individuals with moderate and
severe disabilities.
Appendix A
Situated Learning Student Perspectives
Strongly disagree Strongly agree
Statement 1 2 3 4 5 6
The course facilitated my skills in working as a team member. 
The course format sharpened my problem-solving skills. 
The course format helped sharpen my analytic skills. 
As a result of the course format, I feel confident about tackling unfamiliar situations. 
The course format helped me better understand the learning process. 
The course format provided me with a broad overview of my field of knowledge. 
I felt part of a group of students and staff committed to learning. 
I was able to explore academic interests with staff and students. 
I explored ideas confidently with other people. 
Students' ideas and suggestions were used during the course. 
The course format provided me with opportunities to use both creative and reflective processes. 
The course format developed my confidence to investigate new ideas. 
I consider what I learned valuable for my teaching career. 
I learned to apply principles learned from this course to new situations. 
The format of the course provided opportunities for more transference of learning to a real-
world setting.

The course format allowed for exploration of different methods, approaches and options for
instructional decision making.

The course format provided opportunities to manipulate variables to realize results. 
The course format facilitated the acquisition of facts and procedures. 
The course format provided opportunities to practice multiple skills. 
The course format provided opportunities to articulate with colleagues about effective
instructional practice.

The course format was intrinsically motivating. 
8 SAGE Open
Appendix B
Focus Group Questions
 1. Is the hands-on approach to learning important? Why
or why not?
2. What do you perceive as the purpose of hands-on
learning?
 3. Would you prefer to use this approach rather than the
traditional classroom approach?
4. What is your perception of the learning that takes
place in this environment?
 5. Are there positive aspects of using this approach?
 6. Are there negative aspects of using this approach?

7. Are there limitations both instructionally and
technologically?
 8. Did aspects of using the hands-on approach limit the
amount of new information you received in this
course?
9. Have you changed your views about the hands-on
approach for this course? In what ways?
10. Are there advantages of meeting on campus?
11. Was anything lacking in the course format that would
have been better if the course was taught more
traditionally?
12. Suggest improvements to this course format that
should be made.
13. In what ways was the course design and delivery ben-
eficial to student learning? Consider both graduate
students, school-aged students, and Arc clients.
14. How can the course design and delivery be improved
to increase student learning?
15. How could the classroom environment be improved
for more effective relationships and communication?
16. What aspects of the classroom environment facilitate
mutual respect?
17. Identify the many interpersonal relationships among
the participants in this course.
18. Which exemplified mutual respect and trust?
19. Which did not?
20. When did cooperative learning occur in the class and
with whom?
21. Which participants were involved in cooperative
learning?
22. What are the positive aspects of cooperative learning?
23. What are the negative aspects?
24. What do you consider to be the most essential charac-
teristics of an instructor in a situated learning
environment?
25. What characteristics did this instructor demonstrate?
26. What characteristics should the instructor focus more
attention on?
27. How did working in small groups benefit you as a
learner?
28. What structure would be more beneficial?
29. How did the instructor facilitate sharing among the
graduate students?
30. What opportunities were you provided to take owner-
ship of your own learning in this course?
31. How did you take ownership of your own learning?
32. What additional opportunities could have been pro-
vided for you?
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research and/or
authorship of this article.
References
Akiba, D., & Alkins, K. (2010). Learning: The relationship between
a seemingly mundane concept and classroom practices. The
Clearing House, 83, 62-67.
Butcher, J., Bezzina, M., & Moran, W. (2011). Transformational
partnerships: A new agenda for higher education. Innovative
Higher Education, 36, 29-40. doi:10.1007/ss10755-010-9155-7
Canipe, J. B., & Decker, M. M. (2004). Kentucky moonlight
schools: An enduring legacy of adult learning principles. Adult
Learning, 15(3-4), 19-21.
Contu, A., & Willmott, H. (2003). Re-embedded situatedness: The
importance of power relations in learning theory. Organization
Science, 14, 283-296.
Donham, J., Heinrich, J. A., & Bostwick, K. A. (2010). Mental
models of research: Generating Authentic Questions. College
Teaching, 58, 8-14.
Fitzgerald, G. A. (2012). Engaging faculty in community engage-
ment. Journal of College Teaching & Learning, 9, 101-105.
Gardiner, L. R., Corbitt, G., & Adams, S. J. (2010). Program
assessment: Getting to a practical how-to model. Journal of
Education for Business, 85, 139-144.
Harris, L., Jones, M., & Coutts, S. (2010). Partnerships and learning
communities in work-integrated learning: Designing a commu-
nity services student placement program. Higher Education
Research & Development, 29, 547-559.
Herrington, J., Reeves, T. C., & Oliver, R. (2006). Authentic
tasks online: A synergy among learner, task and technology.
Distance Education, 27, 233-247.
Knotts, G., Henderson, L., Davidson, R. A., & Swain, J. D. (2009).
The search for authentic practice across the disciplinary divide.
College Teaching, 57, 188-196.
Lunce, L. M. (2006). Simulations: Bringing the benefits of situ-
ated learning to the traditional classroom. Journal of Applied
Educational Technology, 3, 37-45.
Mastro, E., Jalloh, M., & Watson, F. (2006). Come on back:
Enhancing youth development through school/commu-
nity collaboration [Special issue]. Journal of Public Health
Management Practice, S60-S64.
McNall, M., Reed, C. S., Brown, R., & Allen, A. (2009). Brokering
community-university engagement. Innovative Higher
Education, 33, 317-331. doi:10.1007/s10755-008-9086-8
Meyers and Lester 9
Meyers, S. (in press). Life skills training through situated learn-
ing experiences: An alternative instructional model. Journal of
International Special Needs Education.
Miraglia, K., & Smilan, C. (2009). Lessons I learned from land-
scape: An integrated approach. International Journal of
Education Through Art, 5, 169-185.
Nicotera, N., Cutforth, N., Fretz, E., & Summers Thompson, S.
(2011). Dedication to community engagement: A higher edu-
cation conundrum? Journal of Community Engagement and
Scholarship, 4, 37-49.
Selkrig, M., & Keamy, K. (2009). Beyond borderlanders:
Universities extending their role in fostering creative partner-
ships within communities. International Journal of Learning,
16, 186-196.
Struyven, K., Dochy, F., & Janssens, S. (2008). Students' likes and
dislikes regarding student-activating and lecture-based edu-
cational settings: Consequences for students' perceptions of
the learning environment, student learning and performance.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 23, 295-317.
Tower, J., & Broadbent, R. (2011). University and community
partnerships; building social capital and community capacity.
Widening Participation and Lifelong Learning, 13, 51-65.
Trigwell, K., & Ashwin, P. (2006). An exploratory study of situated
conceptions of learning and the learning environments. Higher
Education, 51, 243-258.
Utley, B. L. (2006). Effects of situated learning on knowledge
gain of instructional strategies by students in a graduate level
course. Teacher Education and Special Education, 29, 69-82.
Williams, E. R., Graham, A., McCary-Henderson, S., & Floyd, L.
(2009). From where I stand: African American teacher candi-
dates on their decision to teach. The Educational Forum, 73,
348-364.
Wolfe, M., Van Eijck, M., Pei-Ling, H., Marshall, A., & Mazumder,
A. (2009). What high school students learn during intern-
ships in biology laboratories. American Biology Teacher, 71,
492-496.
Author Biographies
Shelly Meyers is an associate professor in the School of Education
at Richard Stockton College of New Jersey. Her primary responsi-
bilities include teaching preservice special education teachers in
graduate studies, with an emphasis on moderate and severe disabili-
ties, and transition from school to the community. She has pub-
lished on Universal Design for Learning, mentoring, and coaching
in urban educational settings.
David Lester is a distinguished professor of psychology at the
Richard Stockton College of New Jersey in Pomona, New Jersey.
He is a former president of the International Association for Suicide
Prevention. He has published extensively on suicide, murder, and
other issues in thanatology. Mass Murder (2004), Katie's Diary:
Unlocking the Mystery of Suicide (2004), Is there Life after Death?
(2005), A multiple-self theory of personality (2009), Preventing
suicide: Why we don't and how we might (2010), Understanding
and preventing college student suicide (2011) and Suicide in pro-
fessional and amateur athletics (2012).
