Evolutionary Psychology
www.epjournal.net ­ 2015. 13(2): 283-298
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Original Article
Functional Flexibility in Women's Commitment-Skepticism Bias
Christina M. Brown, Department of Psychology, Arcadia University, Glenside, PA, USA. Email:
browncm@arcadia.edu (Corresponding author).
Yevgeniy M. Olkhov, Department of Psychology, Arcadia University, Glenside, PA, USA.
Abstract: If a woman overestimates her romantic partner's commitment, the cost to her
fitness--reproduction without an investing partner--can be considerable. Error
Management Theory predicts that women have an evolved bias to be skeptical of men's
commitment in a relationship, which reduces the likelihood of making a costly false
positive error. However, because error probabilities are inversely related, this commitment-
skepticism bias simultaneously increases the likelihood of missed opportunities, or false
negatives. False positives when gauging a partner's commitment are the more costly error
for women, but missing an opportunity to secure a genuinely high-quality mate can also be
quite costly. We predicted and found that women's mating cognitions are functionally
flexible, such that women do not exhibit the commitment-skepticism bias when faced with
behavioral evidence that a male partner is willing to commit (Study 1). This suggests that
relationship-enhancing behaviors are one contextual cue that may lessen the bias. However,
not all relationship-enhancing behaviors are equally diagnostic of a person's true
commitment intent. When comparing men and women's commitment thresholds, we found
that women require more behavioral evidence than men do to feel certain of their partner's
commitment to them (Study 2).
Keywords: commitment skepticism, error management, judgment, sex differences, mating,
judgment bias
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
Introduction
Heuristics and biases tend to receive the most attention when they create judgment
errors (Haselton and Funder, 2006). However, Haselton and Buss's (2000) Error
Management Theory (EMT) interprets certain heuristics and biases as evidence of adaptive
cognition and notes that their output is generally useful. EMT states that mental processes
have evolved over time, with humans developing biases to think or respond in ways that
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -284-
have increased reproductive success in the past. Virtually all decisions contain some degree
of uncertainty about which choice will produce the optimal outcome for the person.
According to EMT, decision makers faced with uncertainty exhibit adaptive biases when
the decision is in a domain that has had recurring consequences for survival and
reproduction in the past.
From a signal detection framework, decision makers can commit two types of
errors: A false positive (i.e., Type I error) is stating the presence of a stimulus when it is
absent, whereas a false negative (i.e., Type II error) is failing to recognize the presence of a
stimulus. According to EMT, there are certain decision-making domains that have recurred
over evolutionary history in which the two types of errors have reliably differed in their
cost or benefit to the individual's fitness (Haselton and Buss, 2000). Natural selection has
shaped humans to be biased to choose the option that, if incorrect, will be the least costly
error.
A classic example is the predator-alarm bias (Barrett, 2005). A person who is hiking
in the woods and hears movement in the leaves should be biased to first interpret the sound
as a threat (a positive, or "stimulus present," response in signal detection) and react
correspondingly (e.g., attending to the sound and behaving with caution). In this situation,
overreacting to a benign noise (a false positive) is a less costly error to one's fitness than
missing a real threat (a false negative). In this context, the bias toward making a positive
response is a functional one.
Based on EMT, Haselton and Buss (2000) propose that men and women should
exhibit biases in mating decisions, a domain critical to reproduction yet filled with
uncertainty. Sex differences in reproductive physiology and parental investment (e.g., Buss
and Schmitt, 1993) create cost asymmetries in men and women's mating decisions, and
therefore men and women should exhibit different biases when faced with uncertainty
about a potential mate. Haselton and Buss (2000) predict that women should exhibit a
commitment-skepticism bias in which they underestimate how committed a male partner
will be to them, because it is more costly for women (relative to men) to reproduce with a
partner who will abandon them than to miss an opportunity to reproduce with a partner who
would remain committed. The former error represents a false positive, whereas the latter is
a false negative; women should be biased toward making negative judgments (believing a
potential mate won't be committed) because, if they are incorrect, this error would be less
costly than a false positive.
As for men, Haselton and Buss (2000) predict a sexual overperception bias, such
that men will tend to overestimate a woman's sexual interest in them. Because women are
"sexual gatekeepers" (Baumeister and Vohs, 2004), missing the opportunity to mate with a
woman who is interested in them (a false negative) is more costly than pursuing a woman
who will ultimately reject them (a false positive). The cost of a false positive is wasted time
and effort courting the woman before receiving her rejection, which is much milder than
the cost of a false negative: losing a potential opportunity for reproduction.
Evidence for and flexibility of the commitment-skepticism bias
There is considerable evidence for a sexual overperception bias in men (e.g.,
Abbey, 1987; Haselton, 2003; Haselton and Buss, 2000; Henningsen and Henningsen,
2010; Koenig, Kirkpatrick, and Ketelaar, 2007; Perilloux, Easton, and Buss, 2012),
although it is moderated by both the perceiver's personality (Jacques-Tiura, Abbey,
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -285-
Parkhill, and Zawacki, 2007; Perilloux et al., 2012) and the target's mate value (Koenig et
al., 2007; Perilloux et al., 2012). There are considerably fewer studies on a commitment-
skepticism bias in women.
A commitment-skepticism bias is found when women's estimates of men's
willingness to commit are significantly lower than men's estimates for themselves and for
other men. Men's estimates for themselves might be slightly inflated as a result of strategic
self-enhancement; likewise, men might underreport other men's commitment out of a
desire to derogate potential rivals (Haselton and Buss, 2000). Haselton and Buss suggest
that the "truth" is most likely somewhere between men's self-estimates and estimates for
other men, and therefore the most compelling evidence for the commitment-skepticism bias
is when women's estimates are below both male estimates.
Haselton and Buss (2000) and Cyrus, Schwarz, and Hassebrauck (2011) have
observed a commitment-skepticism bias in young women by asking women and men to
evaluate three targets' willingness to commit in romantic relationships: themselves, typical
men, and typical women. For example, participants indicate their agreement with questions
such as, "Most men at my age prefer many different sex partners over getting committed to
one partner." Young women perceive men in general as less willing to commit than men
perceive themselves and other men (Cyrus et al., 2011; Haselton and Buss, 2000).
Henningsen and Henningsen (2010) also observed a commitment-skepticism bias
during actual male-female dyadic interactions. In their study, opposite-sex undergraduate
student dyads had a 5-minute face-to-face "getting acquainted" conversation, after which
they each reported their own and their partner's desire for a committed relationship with
one another. Overall, women's estimates of their male partners' interest in a committed
relationship were lower than those men's actual self-reported interest in commitment.
However, when the women themselves were quite interested in pursuing a committed
relationship with their partner, they no longer underestimated their partner's commitment (a
finding to which we will later return).
The research by Haselton and Buss (2000), Henningsen and Henningsen (2010),
and Cyrus et al. (2011) represent the only published demonstrations of the commitment-
skepticism bias that we were able to find, compared to the mature literature on the sexual
overperception bias in men (in fact, see La France, Henningsen, Oates, and Shaw [2009]
and Perilloux [2014] for a meta-analysis and review, respectively, on men's sexual
overperception).
Just as characteristics of both the perceiver and the target have been found to
moderate men's sexual overperception, perceiver characteristics also moderate women's
commitment-skepticism. Specifically, Cyrus et al. (2011) observed that the commitment-
skepticism bias, as measured by general questions, was only present in women under the
age of 34. The bias was absent in women who were post-menopausal and therefore did not
face the risk of pregnancy without partner investment, which is theorized to drive the bias.
In addition, Peterson, Carmen, and Geher (2013) recently found a positive correlation
between women's current likelihood of conceiving a child and their perception that men
want sex without commitment.1 Both datasets indicate that women are more cautious in
1 This study did not include male participants, so the conclusion from this research is that high conception-
risk women are more skeptical of men's commitment relative to low conception-risk women. We do not
know if and to what degree their skepticism underestimated men's self-reported desire for commitment.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -286-
their belief that men are willing to commit when the risk of pregnancy without an investing
partner is greatest. This suggests that the commitment-skepticism bias is "functionally
flexible" (Schaller, Park, and Kenrick, 2007) rather than fixed.
It is important to recall, however, that Henningsen and Henningsen (2010) found
that women accurately estimated their male partner's commitment interest when they
themselves were quite interested in committing to him. This could indicate simple
projection of one's own interest onto the target of that interest (for which there is
considerable evidence; see Koenig et al., 2007; Lenton, Bryan, Hastie, and Fischer, 2007),
which is how the authors interpreted this finding. Alternatively, we suggest that perhaps
those women detected a desirable quality in their partners that both increased their
attraction and inhibited the bias. Although there is no evidence for our suggested
interpretation, inhibiting the bias when faced with evidence of actual commitment interest
on the man's part would in fact be quite functional, as it would prevent women from
missing an opportunity to pursue a high-quality mate (an error that could be quite costly). If
the commitment-skepticism bias is down-regulated in the presence of a potential mate who
possesses desirable qualities--such as actual willingness to commit--this would be
additional, yet novel, evidence of functional flexibility in women's mating cognitions.
The current research
The purpose of the current research was to test the conditional nature of the
commitment-skepticism bias. We suggest that women's skepticism of men's commitment
is responsive to men's behavior. First, we predict that when women receive information
suggesting that a man is indeed committed, the commitment-skepticism bias will be
diminished. However, this does not mean that women should be quick to interpret any
potential sign of commitment as indisputable evidence of commitment. Instead, women
should be discriminating in what they consider a valid sign of commitment. To this end,
our second prediction was that women will have a higher threshold than men for accepting
a partner's actions as evidence of commitment.
We conducted two studies to test our hypotheses. These were preceded by a pilot
study in which we first sought to replicate the commitment-skepticism bias with our
particular participant population (individuals recruited via Amazon.com's Mechanical
Turk) while using the same measure of general commitment beliefs used by other
researchers. After establishing that the commitment-skepticism bias is indeed present in our
population, we conducted Study 1 using the same population and the same measure to test
whether the bias is reduced by behavioral evidence that a partner wants commitment in the
relationship.
Behavior can be a rich source of information about another person's intentions and
disposition. Of course, people can also strategically change their behavior to produce a
desired impression, but in general perceivers form fairly accurate impressions of other
people based on their behavior (e.g., Funder, 1995; Vazire, 2010). A committed man may
be considered a "limited resource" for which women compete with one another (Bleske and
Shackelford, 2001), and if certain relationship-enhancing behaviors are indeed evidence of
genuine commitment, "missing" this signal may actually become the more costly error. In
other words, if women down-regulate their skepticism about men's commitment in the face
of compelling evidence of commitment, this might be evidence of functional flexibility in
cognitive biases.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -287-
We conducted Study 1 to test our interpretation that specific relationship-enhancing
behaviors are a signal that reduces the commitment-skepticism bias in women, and we did
this by selecting behaviors that were pre-tested to be seen as highly indicative of
commitment. However, there are other, easy-to-fake behaviors that people can engage in to
falsely convince a partner of their commitment intentions. The existence of these behaviors
makes it maladaptive for women to relax the bias in the presence of any evidence of
commitment. Therefore, Study 2 compared men and women's thresholds for perceiving
commitment in a partner, and we predicted that women would require more behavioral
evidence than men before they are certain of a partner's commitment. Collectively, the goal
of these two studies is to show that while the commitment-skepticism bias exists, it is also
functionally flexible, such that women do not continue to doubt their partners when
presented with diagnostic evidence of commitment intent.
Pilot study
Overview
A pilot study was first conducted to test whether the commitment-skepticism bias is
replicated in the participant population we intended to use for Studies 1 and 2.
Materials and Methods
Participants
A total of 130 participants were recruited from Amazon.com's Mechanical Turk
(MTurk; see Buhrmester et al., 2011). MTurk is an online system in which businesses and
researchers (called "requesters") offer a small amount of monetary compensation for
participants (called "workers") to complete brief and simple online tasks. In all studies
reported here, we limited our survey to participants residing in the United States.
Participants were paid 15 cents for their time.
Because the commitment-skepticism bias concerns heterosexual relationships, we
only analyzed the data of participants who revealed a heterosexual orientation (by
indicating that they are most attracted to the opposite sex). In addition, because Cyrus et al.
(2011) found commitment-skepticism only in younger women, we used their age cut-off of
34 or younger.2 After excluding non-heterosexual and participants older than 34, our final
sample consisted of 82 participants (37 men, 45 women; Mage
= 25.26; SDage
= 4.63).
Measures
We used each of Cyrus et al.'s (2011) unique questions about commitment
perceptions. Specifically, we used items 1­5 from their Study 1 and items 2­7 from their
Study 2 (item 1 from Study 2 was redundant with item 5 from Study 1). Participants
answered these 11 items in three blocks: in reference to the self (e.g., "I prefer many
different sex partners over getting committed to one partner"), in reference to men in their
age group (e.g., "A typical man at my age needs to know that a woman loves him before he
is willing to have sex with her"), and in reference to women in their age group (e.g., "As
2 When older participants are included in the sample, we still obtained a significant commitment-skepticism
bias.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -288-
long as a woman at my age can have lots of sex without commitment, she will avoid getting
committed to one man"). Depending on block, participants indicated the extent to which
they thought each statement was true of themselves, men in their age group, or women in
their age group on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Participants completed each of the three commitment blocks in the same order: self,
same-sex, and opposite-sex. The scale was reliable (women rating self  = .85; men rating
self  = .82; women rating men  = .86; men rating men  = .83; women rating women  =
.87; men rating women  = .88).
Procedure
After providing informed consent, participants indicated whether they were most
attracted to men or women. They then completed each of the three commitment blocks,
followed by demographic questions.
Results and Discussion
The commitment-skepticism hypothesis is that women will underestimate a male
partner's commitment, relative to men's self-reported commitment and same-sex reports.
First, women perceived less commitment in men (M = 3.04, SD = .93) than men
perceived in other men (M = 3.50, SD = .91), t(80) = 2.23, p = .029, d = .50, and less than
men reported for themselves (M = 5.04, SD = .92), t(80) = 9.73, p < .001, d = 2.16.
Women's underestimation of men's commitment, relative to both men's impression of
other men and of themselves, reflects the commitment-skepticism bias. Not surprisingly,
men saw themselves as considerably more committed than other men, t(36) = 6.12, p <
.001, d = 1.01, which could reflect both self-enhancement and rival derogation.
Second, men's perception of women's commitment (M = 4.75, SD = .91) did not
differ from women's perception of other women's commitment (M = 4.73, SD = .99), t(80)
= .09, p = .93, d = .02. Replicating Cyrus et al. (2011), women saw themselves as more
committed (M = 5.92, SD = .94) than men saw women, t(80) = 5.67, p < .001, d = 1.26.
Cyrus et al. (2011, p. 11) interpret this as evidence that women also use self-enhancement
tactics. Supporting this self-enhancement interpretation, women (like men) rated their own
commitment significantly higher than they rated the commitment of other members of their
sex, t(44) = 6.13, p < .001, d = .92.
To summarize, we successfully replicated the commitment-skepticism bias using a
sample of adults recruited from MTurk and measuring commitment with questions
assessing general perceptions of oneself, the same sex, and the opposite sex (e.g., Cyrus et
al., 2011).
Study 1
Overview
We predicted that the commitment-skepticism bias is functionally flexible, such that
women will not exhibit the bias when faced with diagnostic cues about a man's willingness
to commit to his partner. To test this, we manipulated whether participants reported their
perceptions of commitment while imagining that a romantic partner had displayed certain
commitment-signaling behaviors. The control condition was similar to the pilot study. In
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -289-
the behavior condition, participants were told to imagine they were evaluating a person
who had displayed the four commitment-signaling behaviors. These behaviors were
selected based on a second pilot study, n = 74, in which participants rated the degree of
commitment conveyed by various relationship behaviors.
Materials and Methods
Participants
A total of 261 participants were recruited from MTurk. They were paid 20 cents for
their time. In addition to asking participants which sex they were most attracted to (as we
did in the pilot study), we also asked participants to self-report their sexual orientation at
the end of the study. Participants' reported attraction did not always match their reported
sexual orientation, which could reflect bisexuality or inattentive responding. To be
cautious, we only analyzed the data of participants who both self-reported as heterosexual
and indicated being most attracted to the opposite sex. After excluding non-heterosexual
participants and those over the age of 34, our final sample had 117 men and 51 women
(Mage
= 25.92; SDage
= 4.63).
Measures
Participants rated their agreement with the same 11 statements about commitment
perceptions (e.g., "A typical man at my age needs to know that a woman loves him before
he is willing to have sex with her") that were used in the pilot study (from Cyrus et al.,
2011). They rated their perceptions in three blocks, ordered as follows: opposite-sex, same-
sex, self. Each statement was rated on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
In the control condition, participants were simply told, "Please answer the following
questions [about yourself]/[based on a typical heterosexual man in your age group]/[based
on a typical heterosexual woman in your age group]."
Prior to seeing the commitment statements, participants in the behavior condition
were told to imagine they were rating someone who had engaged in certain behaviors.
Below are the instructions that participants saw in the self-block (the male version is
displayed; pronouns were switched for female participants):
Regardless of your current relationship status, please imagine that you are dating a
woman and you display these behaviors:
 You surprise her with a gift of something she once mentioned she really wanted.
 You cancel your plans when she needs help with something.
 You stay up late to talk to her about problems she's having, even though you
have to wake up early.
 You tell your friends about how great she is.
Please answer the following questions based on this imagined version of yourself.
For the same-sex and opposite-sex blocks, similar instructions were used. For
example, the male same-sex instructions began: "Please imagine a typical heterosexual man
in your age group. Imagine that this man is dating a woman and displays these behaviors:
He surprises her with a gift of something she once mentioned she really wanted..." etc.,
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -290-
and ended with, "Please answer the following questions based on your impression of this
man."
The measure of commitment perceptions was reliable (women rating self  = .88;
men rating self  = .91; women rating men  = .96; men rating men  = .92; women rating
women  = .88; men rating women  = .89).
Procedure
After providing informed consent, participants indicated their own sex and the sex
to which they were most attracted. They were then randomly assigned to either the control
or behavior condition. The last page of the survey contained demographic questions.
Results
Perceptions of men
Does women's underestimation of men's commitment depend on whether they are
judging the commitment of a typical man or a man who has engaged in behaviors that
convey commitment? We conducted two 2 (sex) × 2 (condition) ANOVAs on perceived
commitment in men. The variable of sex in the first ANOVA represented women's ratings
of men versus men's self-ratings. In the second ANOVA, sex represented women's ratings
of men versus men's ratings of other men.
The first ANOVA revealed two significant main effects, which were qualified by a
significant interaction, F(1, 164) = 19.44, p < .001, p
2 = .11. Simple effects analyses
showed that in the control condition, women underestimated men's commitment (M = 3.55,
SD = 1.08) relative to men's self-ratings (M = 4.95, SD = 1.26), F(1, 164) = 25.61, p <
.001, p
2 = .14. However, the commitment skepticism bias did not occur in the behavior
condition; women's perception of men (M = 5.30, SD = 1.18) did not significantly differ
from men's self-ratings (M = 4.97, SD = 1.11), F(1, 164) = 1.41, p = .237, p
2 = .01. In fact,
in the behavior condition women tended to see more commitment in men's behavior than
men reported for themselves. Analyzing the simple effects another way, men's perceptions
of their own commitment was unaffected by condition, F(1, 164) = .01, p = .932, p
2 < .01,
whereas women's perception of men's commitment was significantly greater in the
behavior condition, F(1, 164) 28.52, p < .001, p
2 = .15. In other words, the behavior
manipulation eliminated the commitment-skepticism bias by increasing women's
perception of men's commitment.
When women's underestimation was judged by comparing their perceptions of men
to men's perceptions of other men (instead of men's self-ratings), the commitment-
skepticism bias was not replicated. This 2 × 2 ANOVA also revealed a marginally
significant interaction, F(1, 164) = 2.88, p = .092, p
2 = .02, but the pattern differed from
the significant interaction with men's self-ratings. In the control condition, women's
perceptions of men (see previous paragraph for Ms) did not significantly differ from men's
perceptions of other men (M = 3.47, SD = .78), F(1, 164) = .13, p = .724, p
2 < .01.
However, in the behavior condition, women saw men as more committed than men saw
other men (M = 4.64, SD = 1.09), F(1, 164) = 7.53, p = .007, p
2 = .04. Recall that the same
pattern was observed when men's self-ratings were the referent (i.e., the first ANOVA), but
the pattern was not significant. This hints that men may believe other men are being
deceptive or strategic when they engage in these behaviors (to convince their partners of
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -291-
their commitment), but believe that these behaviors indicate genuine commitment if they
engage in these actions themselves.
As in the pilot study, men rated themselves as significantly more committed than
other men, t(116) = 7.47, p < .001, d = .69. If self-enhancement and rival derogation cause
inflated self-ratings and underestimated same-sex ratings, with the true estimate of men's
commitment lying somewhere in the middle, it could be worth comparing women's ratings
of men to the mean of men's self and same-sex ratings. The mean score of men's self-
rating and same-sex rating in the control condition was 4.21, and women's rating of men in
the control condition was significantly below this mean, t(25) = -3.11, p = .005, indicating
commitment-skepticism. In contrast, the mean of men's self and same-sex ratings in the
behavior condition was 4.81, and women's rating of men was significantly greater than this
mean, t(24) = 2.07, p = .049. This means that women underestimated men's commitment in
the control condition but overestimated men's commitment intentions when judging a man
who had engaged in relationship-enhancing behaviors. In other words, the behavior
condition reversed the commitment-skepticism bias (see Figure 1).
For interested readers, we also conducted the analyses with older participants
included. These analyses replicated all significant main effects and interactions reported
above.
Figure 1. Men and women's ratings of men's commitment by condition
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Women's rating of
men
Men's same-sex
rating
Men's self-rating
Perceived Commitment
Control
Behavior
Perceptions of women
We conducted two 2 (sex) × 2 (condition) ANOVAs on perceived commitment in
women, the first comparing men's perception of women to women's self-ratings and the
second comparing men's perception of women to women's perceptions of other women.
The first ANOVA revealed only a main effect of sex, F(1, 164) = 44.65, p < .001,
p
2 = .21, with men seeing women as less committed (M = 5.17, SD = .89) than women see
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -292-
themselves (M = 6.12, SD = .82). This pattern was also found in the pilot study and in
Cyrus et al.'s (2011) research.
The second ANOVA revealed only two significant main effects. Men saw women
as less committed than women saw other women (M = 5.56, SD = .86), F(1, 164) = 7.66, p
= .006, p
2 = .05. In addition, ratings of women's commitment were higher in the behavior
condition (M = 5.46, SD = .95) than in the control condition (M = 5.12, SD = .80), F(1,
164) = 4.36, p = .038, p
2 = .03. The main effect of behavior is not surprising, although the
main effect of sex reveals that men are underestimating women's commitment in this study.
Lastly, like men, women rated themselves as significantly more committed than
other members of their sex, t(50) = 5.42, p < .001, d = .77.
Once again, for interested readers we repeated the analyses with older participants
included. All significant main effects and interactions replicated in these analyses, although
the non-significant interaction (p = .167) between women's self-ratings and men's ratings
of women became significant, F(1, 224) = 6.51, p = .011, p
2 = .028. This interaction
revealed that, when older adults are included in the sample, the behavior condition
significantly increased men's perception of women's commitment, F(1, 224) = 11.43, p =
.001, p
2 = .05, but it did not change women's self-ratings, F(1, 224) = .45, p = .505, p
2 <
.01.
Discussion
In the control condition--which mirrored the pilot study--we replicated the
commitment-skepticism bias when comparing women's perception of men to men's
perception of themselves, but not when comparing women's perception of men to men's
perceptions of other men. However, we did replicate the commitment-skepticism bias when
the male referent was the statistical mean of men's ratings of themselves and other men
(which may be considered a better estimate of men's true commitment because it adjusts
for both self-enhancement and rival derogation). Surprisingly, the behavior condition did
not simply eliminate the bias; it completely reversed it, so women actually overestimated
men's commitment.
Although we interpret our data as women being sensitive to men's behavior--
because behavior provides evidence of actual commitment intentions--it's worth noting
that the behavior manipulation did not affect men's self-ratings of commitment. In other
words, men's reported interest in a committed relationship was not affected by imagining
that they had exhibited relationship-enhancing behaviors. We see two possible
interpretations of this: First, it may be that men use these behaviors to convince their
partners that they desire commitment, and therefore these behaviors are strategic rather
than diagnostic. In other words, men know the behaviors are simply "for show," but
women are convinced by them. A second, and very different, explanation is that women are
indeed underestimating men's true commitment when they show skepticism, and therefore
the presence or absence of relationship-enhancing behaviors may not reflect actual
differences in a man's degree of commitment. Instead, the behaviors may reflect
commitment that is already present. To put it in signal detection terms, women's default
commitment-skepticism may reflect a conservative criterion that causes them to "miss" the
presence of genuine commitment signals. Only when the signal is strengthened by the
presence of relationship-enhancing behaviors will it meet women's high threshold for
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -293-
detection. This means that imagining the behaviors doesn't change men's self-reported
commitment because men already know they are committed, whereas women require those
behaviors to relax their skepticism.
The design of Study 1 does not allow us to test these two possible explanations, but
it does provide compelling evidence that the commitment-skepticism bias is not rigid. Just
as it responds to women's risk of conception (Cyrus et al., 2011), it yields when faced with
contradictory evidence.
But what, exactly, is considered "evidence" of commitment? Do men and women
perceive the same relationship behaviors as equally diagnostic evidence of commitment?
Based on EMT, we predict that women have a higher threshold than men when it comes to
how much evidence is necessary to believe their partner is committed. In Study 1, we
intentionally exposed participants in the behavior condition to behaviors that were pre-
tested to be highly indicative of commitment. EMT makes predictions about decisions
made under uncertainty, and this behavioral evidence reduces some uncertainty. Study 2
tries to pinpoint where the criterion shift for commitment certainty occurs. We predict that
more behavioral evidence is needed to reach women's "commitment threshold" than men's.
Study 2
Overview
To compare men and women's commitment thresholds, we developed a list of
behaviors that could be used to signal commitment. The behaviors varied in how
"convincing" they were, with some being easy to fake. Participants read the behaviors in
ascending order of commitment strength while imagining that the behaviors were
performed by their romantic partner. Participants indicated at what point they would feel
certain about their partner's commitment to them, and that point represented the
participant's commitment threshold. We predicted that women would have a higher
threshold for commitment certainty than men.
Materials and Methods
Participants
A total of 120 participants were recruited from MTurk. After excluding non-
heterosexual participants (using the same criteria as Study 1), participants over the age of
34, and those who failed an attention-check measure (described below), our final sample
had 40 men and 36 women (Mage
= 26.14; SDage
= 4.51). Participants received 20 cents for
participating.
Procedure
After providing informed consent, participants read the following instructions:
In this survey, please imagine that you've been dating someone for 2
months. The following pages will each display a behavior you should imagine your
dating partner doing. Imagine these behaviors are happening in order: First your
partner does the behavior on page 1, then your partner does the behavior on page 2,
after that your partner does the behavior on page 3... And so on.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -294-
Your task is to decide if your partner is committed to you, based on his/her
behavior. If the first behavior does not make you certain of your partner's
commitment, then click "no" below that behavior and proceed to the next one.
Proceed until you feel absolutely certain that your partner is truly committed to you.
Once you feel certain your partner is committed, click "yes."
There is no rule for what it means to be "truly committed." Go by whatever
feels right to you. Select the number 3 below to show that you understand these
instructions.
The last sentence served as a quality control measure, as participants' responses indicated
whether they had paid attention to the instructions. We only analyzed the data of
participants who selected the correct number.
Following the instructions, participants saw up to nine behaviors, one presented per
survey page. Each page would display a behavior, followed by two answer options: "Yes,
my partner is definitely committed to me," and "No, I'm not absolutely certain of my
partner's commitment."
Selecting "Yes" would terminate the task, causing the survey to skip the remaining
behaviors and proceed immediately to a final set of demographic questions. Participants'
commitment threshold score was the number of behaviors they viewed before selecting
"Yes." If a participant still said "No" for the ninth and final behavior, they were given a
score of 10.
The behaviors were selected based on a pilot test (n = 47) in which male and female
participants recruited via MTurk were asked to list three types of commitment behaviors
that could be performed with a romantic partner of two months. We defined commitment
behaviors as "behaviors people could perform to convince their romantic partner that
they're committed to that person and the relationship." The three categories were low
commitment (defined as "behaviors you could do to make your romantic partner believe
you're committed, when the truth is that you aren't strongly committed to your partner (i.e.,
`easy to fake' behaviors)"), moderate commitment ("behaviors you could do to make your
romantic partner believe you're committed, when the truth is that you're moderately
committed to your partner"), and high commitment ("behaviors you could do to make your
romantic partner believe you're committed, and the truth is that you're definitely strongly
committed to your partner"). We selected behaviors that were frequently listed within a
single category by both male and female participants. We arranged the behaviors to appear
in ascending degrees of commitment. They were:
1. Your partner gives you a small gift.
2. Your partner texts you occasionally.
3. Your partner takes you on frequent dates.
4. Your partner changes his/her relationship status on Facebook to "in a
relationship" with you.
5. Your partner wants to go on a vacation with you.
6. Your partner introduces you to his/her family.
7. Your partner asks you to move in with him/her.
8. Your partner proposes marriage.
9. Your partner shares all of his/her assets with you.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -295-
Results and Discussion
Women required more behaviors (M = 4.47, SD = 2.75) to be certain of a partner's
commitment than men did (M = 3.30, SD = 2.32), t(74) = 2.01, p = .048, d = .46. The
difference remains significant with older participants included in the sample, t(102) = 3.53,
p = .001, d = .70. In other words, as predicted, women have a higher threshold for certainty
of a partner's commitment than men do.
General Discussion
The goal of our research was to test the functional flexibility of women's
commitment-skepticism bias. We predicted that the bias would be responsive to men's
behavior. In Study 1, women were not skeptical of a man's commitment if that man had
engaged in multiple commitment-signaling behaviors. We intentionally chose behaviors
that were highly indicative of commitment, and these behaviors not only reduced the bias,
but even reversed it. This shows the conditional nature of women's evolved mating
cognitions, such that they shift away from negative responses (in signal detection terms)
when faced with diagnostic evidence of commitment. However, the system would be
flawed if it responded to any relationship-enhancing behavior as evidence of commitment.
Therefore, in Study 2 we compared the sensitivity of this system in men and women,
predicting that women's system would require more evidence (i.e., a stronger signal) than
men's before switching from a negative response to a positive one. We asked participants
to imagine their romantic partner engaging in a series of behaviors that became
increasingly indicative of commitment over time. As predicted, women required more
behavioral evidence to be certain of a partner's commitment than men did.
Our theory is that the commitment-skepticism bias in women is inherently flexible;
it will not persist in the face of contradictory evidence (i.e., evidence that a man is indeed
committed). If the bias were to persist despite clear evidence of actual commitment
intentions from a potential (or current) partner, this would be maladaptive for women.
There is evidence that women see "good husbands" as a limited resource for which they
must compete (Eichenbaum and Orbach, 1987, as cited in Bleske and Shackelford, 2001),
and if committed men are indeed valuable, then a woman who "misses" such a partner (a
false negative error) is facing a costly loss. Women's decision system is carefully calibrated
to respond to evidence of commitment; the priority is to avoid false positives, but probable
misses are also minimized. In signal detection terms, women, relative to men, require a
stronger signal of commitment before shifting from a negative to a positive response.
Future directions and conclusion
Our research suggests that relationship-enhancing behaviors are one contextual cue
that may lessen the commitment-skepticism bias. The duration of a relationship may be
another important moderating factor. The commitment-skepticism bias is probably
strongest during early courtship between a man and woman, at which time the likelihood of
actual commitment on the man's part may indeed be quite low. However, as early
acquaintance develops into a relationship, women may begin to relax their skepticism. The
simple cue of relationship duration may be enough to reduce or even eliminate the bias,
because the mere fact that the two are in an ongoing relationship evinces the male partner's
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -296-
interest in a long-term connection. In this case, the current duration of the relationship may
indeed be a valid cue of both partners' commitment intentions. It is also possible that
duration effects will be moderated by the presence or absence of specific commitment-
implying behaviors as well, given the results of the present research.
It is also interesting to note that men showed some skepticism of women's
commitment, relative to women's self-ratings, in our pilot study and Study 1. This pattern
was also observed by Cyrus et al. (2011) and is worth investigating in future research.
Lastly, an alternative explanation for Study 1's interaction between sex and
behavior condition--specifically, that only women were influenced by the presence of
commitment behavior--is that women are more accurate than men when perceiving social
behavior. This explanation is consistent with past research showing that women decode
interpersonal cues more accurately than men (e.g., Ambady, Hallahan, and Rosenthal,
1995; Hall, 1984). Although this interpretation remains possible, the findings of Study 2
support the conclusion that women's perceptions of partner commitment are more sensitive
to behavioral cues than are men's perceptions.
To conclude, the current research replicates the existence of a commitment-
skepticism bias in women while also showing that the bias is responsive to men's behavior,
with behavior being a useful signal of commitment probability. This contributes to the
growing literature on adaptive cognition that is sensitive to contextual shifts in risks and
opportunities (e.g., Park, Schaller, and Crandall, 2007; Schaller, 2011; Schaller et al.,
2007).
Received 26 August 2014; Revision submitted 22 January 2015; Accepted 19
February 2015
References
Abbey, A. (1987). Misperceptions of friendly behavior as sexual interest: A survey of
naturally occurring incidents. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 11, 173­194.
Ambady, N., Hallahan, M., and Rosenthal, R. (1995). On judging and being judged
accurately in zero-acquaintance situations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 518­529.
Barrett, H. C. (2005). Adaptations to predators and prey. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The
handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 200­223). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Baumeister, R. F., and Vohs, K. D. (2004). Sexual economics: Sex as female resources for
social exchanges in heterosexual interactions. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 8, 339­363.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. (2011). Amazon's Mechanical Turk: A new
source of inexpensive, yet high-quality data? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 6, 3-5.
Bleske, A. L., and Shackelford, T. K. (2001). Poaching, promiscuity, and deceit:
Combatting mating rivalry in same-sex friendships. Personal Relationships, 8, 407­
424.
Buss, D. M., and Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sexual Strategies Theory: an evolutionary
perspective on human mating. Psychological Review, 100, 204­232.
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -297-
Cyrus, K., Schwarz, S., and Hassebrauck, M. (2011). Systematic cognitive biases in
courtship context: Women's commitment­skepticism as a life-history strategy?
Evolution and Human Behavior, 32, 13­20.
Eichenbaum, L., & Orbach, S. (1987). Between women: Love, envy, and competition in
women's friendships. New York: Penguin Books.
Funder, D. C. (1995). Stereotypes, base rates, and the fundamental attribution mistake: A
content-based approach to judgmental accuracy. In Y. Lee, L. J. Jussim, and C. R.
McCauley (Eds.), Stereotype accuracy: Toward appreciating group differences (pp.
141­156). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hall, J. A. (1984). Nonverbal sex differences: Communication accuracy and expressive
styles. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press.
Haselton, M. G. (2003). The sexual overperception bias: Evidence of a systematic bias in
men from a survey of naturally occurring events. Journal of Research in
Personality, 37, 34­47.
Haselton, M. G., and Buss, D. M. (2000). Error management theory: A new perspective on
biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78,
81­91.
Haselton, M. G., and Funder, D. C. (2006). The evolution of accuracy and bias in social
judgment. In M. Schaller, J. A. Simpson, and D. T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and
social psychology (pp. 15­37). Madison, CT: Psychosocial Press.
Henningsen, D., and Henningsen, M. (2010). Testing error management theory: Exploring
the commitment skepticism bias and the sexual overperception bias. Human
Communication Research, 36, 618­634.
Jacques-Tiura, A. J., Abbey, A., Parkhill, M. R., and Zawacki, T. (2007). Why do some
men misperceive women's sexual intentions more frequently than others do? An
application of the confluence model. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
33, 1467­1480.
Koenig, B. L., Kirkpatrick, L. A., and Ketelaar, T. (2007). Misperception of sexual and
romantic interests in opposite-sex friendships: Four hypotheses. Personal
Relationships, 14, 411­429.
La France, B. H., Henningsen, D. D., Oates, A., and Shaw, C. M. (2009). Social-sexual
interactions? Meta-analyses of sex differences in perceptions of flirtatiousness,
seductiveness, and promiscuousness. Communication Monographs, 76, 263­285.
Lenton, A. P., Bryan, A., Hastie, R., and Fischer, O. (2007). We want the same thing:
Projection in judgments of sexual intent. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 33, 975­988.
Park, J. H., Schaller, M., and Crandall, C. S. (2007). Pathogen-avoidance mechanisms and
the stigmatization of obese people. Evolution and Human Behavior, 28, 410­414.
Perilloux, C. (2014). (Mis)reading the signs: Men's perception of women's sexual interest.
In V. A. Weekes-Shackelford and T. Shackelford (Eds.), Evolutionary perspectives
on human sexual psychology and behavior (pp. 119­133). New York: Springer.
Perilloux, C., Easton, J. A., and Buss, D. M. (2012). The misperception of sexual interest.
Psychological Science, 2, 146­151.
Peterson, A., Carmen, R., and Geher, G. (2013). Ovulatory shifts in mating
intelligence. Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology, 7, 66­75.
Schaller, M. (2011). The behavioral immune system and the psychology of human
Functional flexibility in women's commitment-skepticism bias
Evolutionary Psychology ­ ISSN 1474-7049 ­ Volume 13(2). 2015. -298-
sociality. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
366, 3418­3426.
Schaller, M., Park, J. H., and Kenrick, D. T. (2007). Human evolution and social cognition.
In R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of evolutionary
psychology (pp. 491­504). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Vazire, S. (2010). Who knows what about a person? The Self-Other Knowledge
Asymmetry (SOKA) model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98,
281­300.
