Copyright 1999 by
The Cerontologicsl Society of America
The Cerontologist
Vol. 39, No. 6, 658-667
Guided primarily by transitions theory, this study examined changes over two points in
time (approximately 5 years apart) in multiple life domains (i.e., household tasks, social
life, marital relationship, and well-being) between two groups of husbands aged 60 and
older, who indicated that their wives were not in need of care or assistance due to an
illness or disability at the initial interview. The two groups included husbands who
identified themselves as a provider of care at Time 2 (T2; i.e., they had transitioned into
the caregiver role; n = 26), and those married to healthy wives at T2 (i.e., noncaregivers;
n = 262). Data came from a national probability sample of U.S. adults who were primary
respondents to the National Survey of Families and Households in 1987-88, and who were
followed up longitudinally in 1992-93. Findings suggested that husbands who entered the
caregiving role demonstrated significant changes in household responsibilities, social
integration, marital relationship, and well-being. Implications for practice and future
research on the older husband caregiver are highlighted.
Key Words: Male caregiver, Household tasks, Social life, Well-being
Caregiving as a Life Course Transition Among
Older Husbands: A Prospective Study
Betty J. Kramer, PhD1 and James David Lambert, PhC2
Although men "provide care in substantial numbers"
(Marks, 1996, p. 34), making up nearly 30% of all
caregivers (Cantor, 1983; Chang & White-Means, 1991)
and over 36% of spouse caregivers (Stone, Cafferata,
& Sangl, 1987), the vast majority of research has
centered on the experience of the female caregiver.
Attention to the experience of the male caregiver, par-
ticularly the husband caregiver, is important for three
primary reasons. First, husbands play a major and im-
portant role in caring for older women with chronic
illness. We know that they are the first persons usu-
ally called upon to meet their wives' needs for care,
they are the oldest subgroup of caregivers, and they
report spending the greatest number of extra hours
fulfilling caregiver responsibilities (Chang & White-
Means, 1991; Stone et al., 1987). Second, husbands
are severely underrepresented in interventions de-
signed for assisting caregivers (Toseland & Rossiter, 1989),
which is perhaps a reflection of our failure to craft
interventions that respond to the unique needs of the
male caregiver. Finally, the current national prevalence
of male caregiving and projected future demographic
This research was supported by a grant from the University of Wiscon-
sin, Graduate School. The National Survey of Families and Households
(NSFH) was funded by CPR-NICHD Grant HD21000. NSFH was designed
and carried out at the Center for Demography and Ecology at the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin-Madison under the direction of Larry Bumpass and James
Sweet. The authors gratefully acknowledge the statistical consultation pro-
vided by Ronald C. Serlin and Roger Brown, and comments of Marsha
M. Seltzer, Jan S. Greenberg, Nadine F. Marks, Leonard I. Pearlin, Arthur
Reynolds, and Dan Meyer.
1Address correspondence to Betty J. Kramer, School of Social Work,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1350 University Ave., Madison, Wl 53706-
1575. E-mail: ejkramer@facstaff.wisc.edu
department of Psychology, Edgewood College, Madison, Wl.
trends suggest that increases in men's rates of mar-
riage and declines in male mortality will significantly
increase the number and proportion of husband care-
givers in the future (Himes, 1992; Marks, 1996). Identify-
ing the ways in which the transition into the caregiving
role may reorganize the internal and external world
of the older man is vital to planning interventions and
services for this unique and growing population.
Caregiver Role Acquisition
as a Life Course Transition
Over the past three decades, a tremendous amount
of attention has been given to the study of transitions
across the life span, but only recently has this con-
cept emerged in the caregiving literature (Pearlin &
Aneshensel, 1994; Schumacher, 1995; Seltzer & Li,
1996; Skaff, Pearlin, & Mullan, 1996). Pearlin and
Aneshensel (1994) have suggested that caregiving may
be conceptualized as a "career" that changes through
time and involves several major transitions. The es-
sential transition into the caregiving role is referred to
as role acquisition or role enactment. Because prior
research has relied on samples of persons already oc-
cupying the caregiving role, this is the least studied
transition, and yet the one about which most assump-
tions have been made (i.e., assuming that the effects
reported by caregivers currently occupying the caregiver
role are the result of role acquisition). Role acquisi-
tion is believed to be highly insidious when the con-
ditions requiring care are chronic and progressive, as
are the majority of later life illnesses (Pearlin & Aneshensel,
1994; Seltzer & Li, 1996). Seltzer and Li (1996) pointed
out that it is very difficult for family caregivers to identify
658 The Gerontologist
the beginning of caregiving because much of what is
done in this role is an "extension of an ongoing car-
ing relationship and grows out of prior patterns of sup-
port and assistance" (p. 614). This is especially true
for spouses because of the personal and legal com-
mitments made in the marital contract (Montgomery,
1996).
Although life course transitions have traditionally been
conceptualized as occurring with the onset of certain
discrete events (e.g., birth of a baby, first day at school,
retirement), theoreticians in this area are urging for a
redefinition--one that views transitions as long-term
social processes (Elder, 1991; Cowan, 1991). Within
this contemporary view, transitions may be defined as
life changes and long-term "processes" that influence
both external (e.g., changes in behavior, role arrange-
ments, social and interpersonal relationships) and in-
ternal (e.g., shifts in perceptions) aspects of one's life
(Cowan, 1991). As recommended by George (1993),
this study integrates a life course perspective, social
stress theory, and role theory to yield a richer under-
standing of life transitions experienced by husbands
in later life. The primary intent of this study is to ex-
amine changes over two points in time (approximately
5 years apart) in multiple life domains (i.e., household
tasks, social integration, marital relationship, and well-
being) between two groups of husbands who all indi-
cated that their wives were not in need of care or
assistance due to an illness or disability at the initial
interview. The two groups of husbands included those
who identified themselves as providers of care at Time
2 (T2; i.e., they had transitioned into the caregiver
role) and those married to healthy wives at T2 (i.e.,
noncaregivers). It is proposed that husbands who have
transitioned into the caregiving role will show evidence
of changes in household tasks, social integration, marital
relationship, and well-being, whereas husbands who
have well spouses at both times of measurement will
not.
The Existing Evidence
Household Tasks.--From a life course perspective,
it is not surprising that research on the division of house-
hold labor indicates significant cohort differences in
the amount of time spent by husbands in household
tasks (Stoller & Cutler, 1992). Despite some change
toward somewhat more egalitarian patterns of house-
hold work among younger cohorts of married couples,
several small- and large-scale investigations have dem-
onstrated the presence of traditional gender differen-
tiation in the division of household responsibilities in
later-life families, which persists after taking employ-
ment status and retirement into consideration (Ade-
Ridder & Brubaker, 1988; Keith, 1980, 1985, 1994;
Szinovacz, 1989). Common responsibilities tradition-
ally and consistently reported by older wives include
indoor activities and tasks such as cooking, washing
dishes and clothes, writing letters, and cleaning; whereas
common responsibilities reported by husbands include
outdoor activities and tasks such as yard work, car main-
tenance, and home repairs (Brubaker & Kinsel, 1985;
Szinovacz, 1980). Although men after retirement do
more housework than other husbands (Rexroat & Shehan,
1987), their contribution remains small compared to
that of their wives (Dorfman & Heckert, 1988; Keith
& Schafer, 1986). However, these studies do not take
caregiving status into account. Family caregivers com-
monly report work role disruptions (Kramer & Kipnis,
1995), and spouses become more involved in house-
hold tasks that are not traditional for their gender if
their partner has serious health problems (e.g., see Kaye
& Applegate, 1994; Szinovacz, 1980; Wright, 1993).
As suggested by role theory this may result in role
incongruence for men as they take on entirely new
household roles (Allen, 1994). In one of the few care-
giving studies to simultaneously compare time spent
in house-hold tasks among noncaregiving and caregiv-
ing husbands and wives, Wright (1993) reported that
among noncaregiving spouses, the division of labor fell
along traditional gender lines; however, the caregiving
spouses spent significantly more time engaging in all
household tasks and responsibilities than their afflicted
spouses.
Social Integration.--Life transitions commonly involve
reorganization in relationships between individuals and
their social networks (Cowan, 1991). Recent evidence
from longitudinal studies suggests that there tends to
be stability in time spent in social and recreational
activities across the life span, but that more change is
evident in the later years (Singleton, Forbes, & Agwani,
1993). Many of the changes that accompany chronic
illness and caregiving may lead to significant declines
in the social life and contacts of the later-life couple
(Biegel, Sales, & Schulz, 1991). Restrictions in social
activities are greatest among spousal caregivers when
compared witn other subgroups of caregivers (Barber
& Pasley, 1995). In a study of predominantly male
spouses living with wives with chronic illness, Revenson
and Majerovitz (1991) reported that nearly one third
of husbands interviewed reported declines in social
and recreational activities. In a cross-sectional study
comparing caregivers to a noncaregiving random com-
munity sample, George and Gwyther (1986) reported
that caregivers had substantially lower levels of social
participation for multiple social activity indicators, with
the exception of church attendance.
For many older adults, religious involvement is an
important source of social connection and support. Na-
tional estimates suggest that religious involvement is
higher among older adults than among any other age
group (Princeton Religion Research Center, 1994). Al-
though some longitudinal studies have suggested that
religious involvement is relatively stable over time
(Markides, 1983), others have found a decline in reli-
gious activity with age but stability in religious atti-
tudes (Blazer & Palmore, 1976). Data from a three-
wave longitudinal study revealed that "indicators of
religiosity remained fairly stable over time, with the
possible exception of religious attendance, which de-
clined slightly among the very old" (Markides, Levin,
& Ray, 1987, p. 664). One possible explanation for
this finding is that illness may reduce the ability of
older adults to attend church. This has not yet been
investigated among caregiving samples.
Vol. 39, No. 6, 1999 659
The restrictions in social life that often accompany
chronic illness and caregiving may simultaneously limit
the availability of emotional support to the older man.
Given that older men have been found to rely almost
exclusively on their spouses for emotional support
(Chappell, 1990), spousal illness and the accompany-
ing symptoms, pain, or preoccupation with illness con-
ditions may further reduce the availability of emotional
support from ill wives (Hafstrom & Schram, 1984; Reven-
son, 1994). Several studies have indicated that hus-
bands with ill spouses were reluctant to add to their
wives' concerns by seeking their support (Leiber, Plumb,
Gerstenzang, & Holland, 1976; Lichtman & Taylor,
1986; Van der Does & Duyvis, 1989).
Marital Relationship.--A large proportion of the
caregiving research that has examined changes in the
marital relationship has focused on samples of per-
sons caring for spouses with dementia. These studies
reported that significant declines in marital intimacy
and quality were associated with the caregiving role
(Blieszner & Shifflett, 1990; Morris, Morris, & Britton,
1988; Wright, 1991). Social exchange and equity theo-
ries would suggest that persons who transition into
caregiving will experience less marital happiness than
noncaregivers as the result of the inequities in ben-
efits and costs that are associated with the caregiving
role (Buunk & Hoorens, 1992). Role theory suggests
that marriages coping with chronic illness and caregiv-
ing may "suffer a crisis because of the resulting chal-
lenge to the established roles and myths that main-
tained the system" (Thompson & Pitts, 1991, p. 121).
Indeed, caregiver spouses have reported significantly
more changes in their marital relationship over time
than noncaregivers (Russo & Vitaliano, 1995). Spousal
illness may affect marital quality, marital interaction,
and marital status (Burman & Margolin, 1992). Using
a longitudinal design and a national sample of 1,298
married persons, Booth and Johnson (1994) reported
that decrements in health were associated with a de-
cline in marital happiness and an increase in divorce
proneness.
Psychological Well-Being.--Stress and coping theo-
ries commonly propose that stressful life events will
be associated with poorer well-being (George, 1993),
and many variations of social stress theory have been
used to study family caregiving (see Kramer & Vitaliano,
1994, for a review of the literature). Two reviews of
the caregiving literature have concluded that although
studies are largely limited by their cross-sectional na-
ture, a fairly consistent pattern of elevated rates of de-
pression is found among caregivers when compared
to noncaregiving controls or population norms (Kriegs-
man, Penninx, & van Eljk, 1994). Findings of higher
levels of depressive symptoms among caregivers as
compared to age-matched controls are documented
in both large- and small-scale studies (Kiecolt-Glaser
et al., 1987; McNaughton, Patterson, Smith, & Grant,
1995; Reese, Gross, Smalley, & Messer, 1994; Russo,
Vitaliano, Brewer, Katon, & Becker, 1995). In the few
studies that have contrasted caregiving husbands
with noncaregiving husbands in particular, caregiving
husbands have reported significantly higher scores on
depression than noncaregiving controls (Fuller-Jonap
& Haley, 1995; Marks, 1998). Less attention has been
given to examining happiness as a well-being out-
come in caregiving, but several longitudinal studies have
supported the premise that stressful life transitions re-
suited in decrements in happiness over time (Chiriboga,
1996).
Research Question and Hypotheses
The primary research question guiding this study is
to what extent will husbands who transition into the
caregiving role show evidence of changes in the amount
of time spent in household tasks, social integration,
marital relationship, and psychological well-being? Based
on previous research and drawing upon a life course
perspective, role theory, stress theory, and transitions
theory, four hypotheses were tested.
1. Husbands who have transitioned into the caregiving
role will report a greater increase than noncaregiving
husbands in time spent doing household tasks that
are traditionally performed by older wives.
2. Husbands who have transitioned into the caregiv-
ing role will be more likely than noncaregiving
husbands to report a decline in their social and
recreational activities, church social events, and emo-
tional support.
3. Husbands who have transitioned into the caregiving
role will be more likely than noncaregiving hus-
bands to report a decline in marital happiness and
to view that their marriage is in trouble.
4. Husbands who have transitioned into the caregiving
role will be more likely than noncaregiving hus-
bands to report an increase in depression and a
decrease in happiness.
Methods
Data
The data used for this research are from the first
and second waves of the National Survey of Families
and Households (NSFH). The first wave (T1), collected
in 1987 and 1988, included a nationally representa-
tive sample of 13,008 noninstitutionalized American
adults aged 19 and older. This survey included a main
sample of 9,637 respondents, with an additional over-
sample of African Americans, Mexican Americans, Puerto
Ricans, single parents, stepparents, cohabitors, and re-
cently married persons. The second wave (T2) of the
NSFH, collected between 1992 and 1994, includes
reinterviews with 10,008 of the original primary re-
spondents from the first wave.
A random selection was done in each of the sampled
households to choose a primary respondent. Data for
both waves were collected during face-to-face inter-
views and, at various segments of the interviews, re-
spondents were asked to complete a self-administered
questionnaire in order to facilitate the collection of
sensitive information. The response rate at T1 (1987-
88) was about 75%. The response rate at T2 was about
660 The Gerontologist
82% of first wave respondents. This yielded national
population coverage at a rate of about 61% (.75 x
.82) for data from both waves (see Sweet, Bumpass,
& Call, 1988, for more design details).
Selecting the Analytic Sample
The analytic sample for this study consisted of
NSFH primary respondents who (a) were age 55 or
older at T1; (b) were married to the same spouse at
both T1 and T2; (c) responded that they had not given
care or assistance to a spouse due to illness or disabil-
ity at T1 (described in more detail below), and who
were also respondents again at T2; and (d) were not
themselves impaired in activities of daily living (ADLs),
and indicated that they did not receive care or assis-
tance due to illness or disability at T1 or T2 (18 non-
caregivers and 3 caregivers were eliminated on this
criterion). This final criterion was used because it is
plausible that being a recipient of care and the condi-
tions that require one to need care may affect one's
ability to perform household tasks, and may also
effect changes in one's social life, marital relationship,
and psychological well-being. These criteria yielded a
sample of 322 husbands.
To assess caregiver status at T1, respondents were
asked, "Do you (or does anyone living here) require
care or assistance because of a disability or chronic
illness?" As discussed above, respondents in the ana-
lytic sample were included on the basis of responding
"no" to this inquiry. At T2, respondents were asked,
"During the last 12 months have you, yourself, given
anyone living with you at the time any help or assis-
tance because of tneir long-term physical or mental
condition, illness, or disability?" If the respondent an-
swered "yes," he was asked, "Who did you give the
most personal care of this kind?" If respondents an-
swered anyone other than their spouse, they were ex-
cluded from this study. Respondents who answered
"yes" to the inquiry regarding giving help and assis-
tance at T2, but not at T1, and who also indicated
"spouse" as the person they gave the assistance to,
were classified as spousal caregivers. Participants who
responded "no" were classified as noncaregivers. Thirty-
four of the husbands in the noncaregiving group were
excluded from the study because they reported that
their spouses had serious chronic illnesses that were
similar to the illnesses reported by the caregiver group.
Among the caregiver group, primary illnesses speci-
fied included the following: malignant cancer or tu-
mors {n = 7); serious respiratory disease (n = 2); heart
attack or serious ongoing heart conditions (n = 4);
stroke (n = 1); digestive and/or urinary disorder (n =
2); mental illness (n = 1); chronic musculoskeletol dis-
ease (n = 3); and arthritis (n = 2). Four of the care-
giving husbands did not specify their spouse's illness
condition. The following primary conditions were iden-
tified by the 34 husbands in the noncaregiving group:
malignant cancer (n = 5); serious respiratory disease
(n = 4); heart attack or serious ongoing heart condi-
tions (n = 14); stroke (n - 2); chronic musculoskeletol
disease (n = 6); serious neurological disorder (n = 1);
amputation (n = 1); and mental illness (n = 1). These
men were excluded from the analyses because these
illness conditions may negatively effect changes over
time in the domains under investigation, and it is pos-
sible that these men are providing care to their wives
even though they do not identify themselves as care-
givers. In addition, because illness conditions for spouses
were not ascertained at T1 for respondents who did
not report caregiving, it can not be concluded with
any certainty that these men experienced a "transi-
tion" concerning the onset of spousal illness. In sum,
the final sample included 288 husbands aged 60 or
older who were married to the same wife at T1 and
T2, who did not initially report providing care to a
spouse, who responded to both survey points, and
who were not receiving care themselves. Approximately
10% (n = 26) made the transition into caregiving dur-
ing the 5-year study period, and the remaining 262
husbands served as noncaregiving controls.
Measures
Functional Impairment of Spouse.--At T2 only, spouses
were asked if their partner needed assistance with five
primary ADLs. These were bathing, dressing, eating,
transferring, and toileting. A scale was computed for
ADLs summing these five conditions (alpha = .70).
Household Tasks.--Respondents were asked to in-
dicate the number of hours typically spent per week
on the following tasks: meal preparation, washing dishes,
cleaning house, shopping, laundry, auto maintenance,
driving, outdoor tasks, and paying bills. This is the cus-
tomary measurement approach used in research stud-
ies examining time spent in household tasks and it
has good face validity (Rexroat & Shehan, 1987; Szinovacz
& Harpster, 1994). The first five of these items (i.e.,
those traditionally associated with the female role) scaled
well together (i.e., alpha = .90) and were of primary
interest to this study. A decision was made to drop
the auto maintenance and outdoor tasks variables as
they are traditionally performed by men and there is
little reason to believe that they may be changed as a
result of caregiver role acquisition. Driving and paying
bills are two household tasks variables that are not as
clearly differentiated by gender. Although they were
not of central interest to this study, these are variables
that may be influenced by caregiving (e.g., driving spouse
to medical appointments or taking over the bill-pay-
ing chores as spouse becomes ill). These two items
are examined separately. Descriptives for all T1 and
T2 household task measures and all other outcome
measures are provided in Table 1.
Social Integration.--Three primary indicators of so-
cial integration were identified. The respondents' in-
volvement in social recreational activities was assessed
by asking how often they "participate in a group rec-
reational activity, such as bowling, golf, square danc-
ing, etc." Responses were reported on a 5-point scale
that included 1 = never, 2 = once a year or less, 3
= about once a month, 4 = about once a week, and
5 = several times a week. Participation in church
social events was assessed by inquiring how often
Vol.39, No. 6, 1999 661
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Analysis Variables
Household Tasks3
Traditional tasks of older wivesb
Driving
Paying bills
Social Integration
Social recreational activities
Religious social events
Emotional support
Marital Relationship
Marital happiness
Perception that marriage in trouble
Psychological Well-Being
Depression
Happiness
Well
Time 1
Mean (SD)
7.42 (9.49)
.91 (2.13)
1.41 (1.99)
.76 (1.22)
1.27 (1.27)
.72 (.45)
6.25 (1.23)
.07 (.26)
2.49 (1.69)
5.92 (1.38)
Spouse Group
(n -262)
Time2
Mean (SD)
9.90 (9.08)
.76 (1.99)
1.47 (1.77)
.90 (1.31)
1.26 (1.09)
.61 (.49)
6.27 (1.35)
.05 (.23)
2.46 (1.47)
5.92 (1.32)
Caregiver
(n =
Time 1
Mean (SD)
6.24 (6.49)
1.08 (1.60)
2.08 (2.05)
.87 (1.26)
1.72 (1.31)
.87 (.34)
6.04 (1.17)
.08 (.28)
2.61 (1.48)
5.71 (1.27)
Croup
26)
Time 2
Mear
17.16 I
1.24
1.44
.60
1.80
.44
5.83
.16
3.61
5.35
i (SD)
[15.81)
(2.04)
(1.80)
(1.12)
(1.08)
(.51)
(1.75)
(.37)
(1.27)
(1.36)
Notes: Descriptive statistics calculated using unweighted data. Dichotomous variable means are proportions.
Source: National Survey of Families and Households, 1987-1993.
aMean number of hours spent per week on these tasks.
bScale included meal preparation, dishes, cleaning, shopping, and laundry.
respondents "attend a social event at your church or
synagogue." Again, responses ranged from 1 = never
to 5 = several times a week. Emotional support was
elicited by asking respondents the following question:
"During the past month, from whom have you re-
ceived advice, encouragement, moral, or emotional
support?" Responses were coded 0 for none received
and 1 for some received.
Marital Relationship.--Marital happiness was assessed
using the question, "Taking things all together, how
would you describe your marriage?" Responses ranged
from very unhappy (1) to very happy (7). Marital trouble
was indicated by responses to the following inquiry:
"During the past year, have you ever thought that your
marriage might be in trouble?" Responses were coded
0 = no and 1 = yes.
Psychological Weil-Being.--Depression was opera-
tionalized using a modified (12-item) version of the
Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (CES-
D) scale (Radloff, 1977). This measure is a brief self-
report scale designed to identify depressive symptomol-
ogy and has been used extensively in caregiver re-
search. The CES-D has satisfactorily high internal con-
sistency and test-retest reliability (Radloff, 1977) and
is predictive of clinical depression (Roberts & Vernon,
1983). Respondents were asked, "On how many days
during the last week did you: feel bothered by things
that usually don't bother you, not feel like eating, feel
you could not shake off the blues, have trouble keep-
ing your mind on what you were doing, feel depressed,
feel that everything you did was an effort, feel fearful,
sleep restlessly, talk less than usual, feel lonely, feel
sad, feel you could not get going?" Each of the 12
symptoms was scored from 0 days of the symptom to
7 days of the symptom. The log transformation of the
depression score was used as the continuous outcome
measure to help correct the positively skewed distri-
bution. In the current study, the Cronbach's alphas
for this index for T1 and T2 were .92 and .89, re-
spectively. Global happiness was measured with a stand-
ard one-item indicator: "Taking things all together, how
would you say things are these days?" Respondents
answered this question in a self-administered booklet
that provided a 7-point scale anchored at one end by
"very unhappy" and at the other end by "very happy."
Demographic Controls.--Several additional demo-
graphic variables were also controlled in all analyses
to control for T1 differences in the sample. As will be
discussed in the section on demographic comparisons,
three social demographic variables differentiated the
two samples at T1. These included age, household in-
come (continuous measure totaled across all types of
earned and unearned income for all household mem-
bers at T1), and employment status (dichotomously
coded 1 = employed vs 0 = not employed). National
studies document that with increasing age caregiving
is more likely, that older spousal caregivers are less
likely to be employed, and that they have lower in-
comes (Soldo & Myllyluoma, 1983; Stone et al., 1987);
all of these variables have known associations with the
outcomes investigated. Another covariate entered in
all analyses was race/ethnicity (dichotomously coded
1 = non-White vs 0 = non-Hispanic White). Relative
to the total aged population, persons of color are more
likely to suffer from functional and health limitations
(Macken, 1986), to experience poorer well-being re-
sulting from marginalized economic and social oppor-
tunities (Markides, Liang, & Jackson, 1990), and to snow
a differential pattern of change in health, well-being,
and social integration in later life (Beckett & Dungee-
Anderson, 1992).
662 The Gerontologist
Analytic Plan
Prior to analysis, all variables were examined for
missing values, and fit between their distributions and
the analytic assumptions. As recommended by Tabach-
nick and Fidell (1989), procedures were followed to
determine whether the data were missing randomly.
A variable was constructed that included missing and
nonmissing cases. Then tests for differences were ex-
amined on demographic and other study variables, and
no systematic pattern was identified. Inspection of z
scores and graphical methods were used to identify
several outliers on household tasks within each group,
and procedures were followed to reduce their influ-
ence. For example, as recommended by Tabachnick
and Fidell, 1989 extreme outliers (i.e., cases for which
the standardized z scores were in excess of + or
-3.00) were truncated (i.e., high scores exceeding the
allowed high value were recoded to the highest al-
lowable vafue) so that they remained deviant, but not
so deviant that they would unduly skew the results.
Variables transformed to improve the distributions of
moderately skewed variables were analyzed, resulting
in a similar pattern of findings as with those not trans-
formed. For ease of interpretation, results using untrans-
formed data will be presented (with the exception of
depression, which was more seriously skewed).
The research question involves examining changes
over time and the differences between the means of
two groups of husbands, while holding constant their
T1 scores and covariates. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
was used to test the mean differences while controlling
for covariates (Cohen & Cohen, 1983). All of the covari-
ates have known association with the dependent vari-
ables and as such, the ANCOVA approach helps to
minimize error variance (Stevens, 1986; Tabachnick &
Fidell, 1989). Although the ANCOVA approach is best
suited to continuous variables, it has been found to
be highly robust against nonnormality for type 1 error
(Stevens, 1986), and as such the two dichotomous
variables (i.e., emotional support and perception of
marital trouble) were retained for these analyses.
Results
Sample Description
Demographic Comparisons.--A description of the
analytic sample (N = 288) is presented in Table 2 by
caregiver status. The two groups differed significantly
in age, income, and employment status. Members of
the caregiver group were approximately 3 years older,
had lower incomes, and were less likely to be em-
ployed than the well spouse group. There were no
significant differences oetween the two samples in
education, race, duration of marriage, and marital his-
tory. There was also no significant difference between
the caregivers (M = 3.73) and noncaregivers {M =
3.95) in their T1 health status, which was measured
on a 5-point scale from 1 = very poor to 5 = excel-
lent, t(268) = 1.18, p = .24.
Care Receiver Level of Impairment.--At T2, all spouses
were asked whether their partner needed assistance
Table 2. T1 Comparisons of Social Demographic
Characteristics by Caregiver Status
Demographic
Characteristics
Well Spouse
Group
(n - 262)
Mean (SD)
Caregiver
Group
(n = 26)
Mean (SD)
Test
Statistic
Age
Education
Non-Caucasian
Income ($ in
thousands)
Employed
Duration
of Marriage
Married More
Than Once
64.66 (7.26)
11.63 (3.97)
.17
39.78 (42.04)
.50
68.09 (7.23)
11.08 (4.60)
.23
29.74 (21.72)
.23
t = -2.40*
t = .65
X2 = -65
t = 2.04*
X2= 6.87**
33.88(13.77) 38.64(12.10) t = -1.85
.25 .15 = 1.24
Notes: Descriptive statistics calculated using unweighted data.
Dichotomous variable means are proportions.
Source: National Survey of Families and Households, 1987-
1993.
*p < .05; **p < .01.
with bathing, dressing, eating, transferring, and toileting.
Five (19%) of the 26 husbands in the caregiver group
indicated that their wives had one or more ADL im-
pairments at T2. All five of these men reported that
their spouses required assistance with bathing, three
reported ADL impairments in dressing, and one addi-
tionally reported ADL spousal impairments in mobility
and toileting. Interestingly, 21 (81%) of the caregiving
husbands reported that their wives did not require
assistance with ADLs. None of the noncaregiving hus-
bands reported spousal ADL impairment.
Changes Associated With Caregiver
Role Acquisition
Household Tasks.--As shown in Table 3, there was
a significant difference between the two groups of hus-
bands in the performance of household tasks tradi-
tionally performed by older wives. As hypothesized,
husbands who entered the caregiving role reported
more time spent doing these household tasks than
noncaregiving husbands. Indeed, after controlling for
the T1 measure and the covariates, caregivers were
spending approximately 7 more hours per week on
average than husbands with well spouses performing
the tasks of meal preparation, dishes, cleaning, shop-
ping, and laundry. As reported in Table 1, prior to
taking on the caregiving role, husbands in the caregiving
group did an average of 6 hours per week of house-
hold tasks, which increased to approximately 17 hours
after taking on the caregiving role. In contrast, in the
well spouse group, there was only a 2-hour increase
in the amount of time spent on household tasks. There
was no difference between the two groups of hus-
bands in the amount of time spent driving or paying
bills.
Social Integration.--Table 3 reveals that there were
changes over time in two social integration variables
Vol. 39, No. 6, 1999 663
Table 3. Adjusted Means and Analysis of Covariance of T2 Household Tasks, Social Life, Marital Relationship,
and Weil-Being by Caregiver Status (N = 288)
Household Tasks0
Traditional tasks of older wivesd
Driving
Paying bills
Social Integration
Social recreational activities
Religious social events
Emotional support
Marital Relationship
Marital happiness
Perception that marriage in trouble
Psychological Well-Being
Depression
Happiness
Well Spouse
Group
(n = 262)
9.95
.81
1.55
.89
1.35
.61
6.36
.07
2.42
5.94
Caregiver
Croup
(n = 26)
17.11
1.19
1.36
.64
1.80
.39
5.80
.17
3.38
5.26
P
Covariates
9.65***
14.55***
8.82***
35.48***
16.96***
2.01
5.19***
20.24***
10.15***
6.46***
Fb
Caregiver
Status
13.29***
.84
.17
1.29
4.68*
3.98*
3.77*
4.51*
10.70***
6.80***
(df)
(1,255)
(1,255)
(1,255)
(1,241)
(1, 239)
(1, 241)
(1, 237)
(1, 226)
(1, 236)
(1, 219)
Notes: Analyses included controls for age, non-White ethnicity, income, employment status, and T1 measures for each variable, and
were calculated using unweighted data.
Source: National Survey of Families and Households, 1987-1988; 1992-1994.
aThe overall F ratio for the covariates age, race, income, employment status, and T1 measure is presented.
bAll comparisons adjusted for covariates.
cMean number of hours spent per week on these tasks.
dScale included meal preparation, dishes, cleaning, shopping, and laundry.
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001.
that differentiated the groups of husbands, though one
was not in the expected direction. As hypothesized,
husbands who transitioned into the caregiving role were
more likely than noncaregiving husbands to report a
decline in their perception of emotional support from
T1 to 12. As shown in Table 1, prior to taking on the
caregiving role, approximately 87% of husbands in the
caregiver group reported receiving emotional support
at T1, which declined to 44% at 12. Alternatively, there
was only a 10% difference in the perception of emo-
tional support received between T1 and T2 among
the well spouse group (i.e., from 72% to 61%). The
adjusted means reported in Table 3 indicate that after
controlling for the T1 score and covariates, only 39%
of the caregivers at T2 reported receiving some form
of emotional support as compared to 61% of the
noncaregivers. Although it was anticipated that the
caregiver group would report a decrease in religious
social events as compared to the noncaregiving group,
the results suggested that they actually reported an in-
crease in time spent in religious social events.
Marital Relationship.--As shown in Table 3, both
of the marital relationship indicators significantly dis-
tinguished the two groups. As hypothesized, husbands
who transitioned into the caregiving role were more
likely than noncaregiving husbands with well spouses
to report a decline in marital happiness and to view
that their marriages were in trouble. As reflected in
Table 1, the T1 and the T2 means among the well
spouse group for marital happiness (i.e., 6.25 and 6.27)
and for the perception that the marriage is in trouble
(.07 and .05) demonstrated little change over time.
Alternatively, the mean marital happiness rating among
the caregiver group declined from 6.04 to 5.83, and
the perception that the marriage was in trouble ap-
proximately doubled from .08 to .16.
Psychological Well-Being.--Table 3 indicates signifi-
cant differences between the two groups of husbands
in the adjusted means for both indicators of psycho-
logical well being. As hypothesized, the caregiving hus-
bands were more likely than the noncaregiving hus-
bands who had well spouses to report an increase in
depression and a decrease in happiness from T1 to
T2. As reflected in Table 1, there is little evidence of
change among the noncaregiving group in mean
levels of T1 and T2 depression (i.e., 2.49 to 2.46) or
happiness (i.e., 5.92 to 5.92). In contrast, mean levels
of T1 and T2 scores among the caregiver group for
depression increased from 2.61 to 3.61, and decreased
from 5.71 to 5.35 for happiness.
Examination of Other Possible Transitions
One might hypothesize that the transition to an-
other living environment or to retirement could influ-
ence changes in several of the dependent variables
under investigation (Rexroat & Shehan, 1987). The care-
giving and noncaregiving husbands were additionally
compared to determine possible differences in these
two transitions that are often associated with aging and
that may offer competing explanations to the patterns
of findings. There were no significant differences be-
tween the two groups in relocation status or retire-
ment status (i.e., they were comparable in the likeli-
hood of these events).
664 The Gerontologist
Discussion
This longitudinal study is the first to examine the
transition into the caregiving role among older hus-
bands. The incidence of caregiving role acquisition was
approximately 10% among the relatively healthy, con-
tinuously married men aged 60 and older, who re-
sponded at both time points. The primary conclusion
drawn from this study is that husbands who have tran-
sitioned into the caregiving role experience signifi-
cant changes in their household tasks, social integra-
tion, marital relationship, and well-being, albeit not
always in the expected directions. This conclusion will
be highlighted in the next section, followed by a dis-
cussion of limitations and possible implications for re-
search and practice.
Evidence of Change.--Compared with noncaregiving
husbands, men who transitioned into the caregiving
role demonstrated significant changes in multiple life
domains. Even after controlling for T1 differences be-
tween the samples, caregiving husbands were spend-
ing significantly more time engaged in household re-
sponsibilities that are traditionally performed by older
wives. This finding supports the premise that spousal
illness may require significant changes in role behav-
ior. According to transitions theory, transitional life events
are typified by changes in patterns of behavior and
roles that may be added, redefined, or involve shifts
in the salience of currently occupied roles (Cowan,
1991).
Husbands who entered the caregiving role showed
significant changes in two aspects of social integration.
They reported a greater increase in participation in
religious social events, and a greater decline in their
emotional support than husbands with well spouses.
Although one prior cross-sectional study noted no dif-
ference in church attendance between caregivers rela-
tive to a random community sample (George & Gwyther,
1986), it is interesting to note that caregiving husbands
in this study actually reported an increase in partici-
pation in religious social events. This finding was sur-
prising as it was expected that illness and disability of
the spouse might reduce the ability of older adults to
attend religious events. An interesting question that
remains to be examined is the extent to which the
increase in church attendance might be a function of
the decreased availability of emotional support. For
many older adults, religious involvement is an impor-
tant source of social connection and support. Does
attendance at religious social events provide needed
social contact that those who are typically isolated ex-
perience? Idler and Kasl (1997) noted.that disabled
older adults who were actively involved in religious
activities "received particular benefits in terms of ad-
ditional contacts and closeness with friends, more nu-
merous holiday celebrations, more optimism, and more
positive affects" (p. S3O3). Suitor and Pillemer (1990)
proposed that family caregiving may be viewed as
social status acquisition that is typically accompanied
by reduced contact with social network members who
have become less similar and a desire to intensify or
develop relationships with others who are perceived
to be more similar. It is possible that caregiving hus-
bands are looking for ways to be connected with
others who possess similar values through religious
social events. Alternatively, the church or synagogue
may be perceived as a place where husbands may
provide opportunities for socialization for wives who
are not as functional as they have been in the past.
Contrary to the expectation, there was no signifi-
cant difference found for time spent in social and recrea-
tional activities among caregiving husbands, although
several cross-sectional studies have noted differences
between caregivers and noncaregivers in social activi-
ties. Some evidence suggests that social activity restric-
tions are more frequently reported among spouses with
cognitive impairments (Bass, McClendon, Deimling, &
Mukherjee, 1994), and most of the illnesses reported
by our analytic sample would preclude such condi-
tions. It is also possible that we have captured a sample
that has not yet experienced such restrictions. Alter-
natively, it may be that the relatively small size of the
caregiver group limits our power to detect the differ-
ences that do exist. For example, the mean for T2 is
lower for the caregiving group and higher for the non-
caregiving group than the T1 scores; however, the sample
size may not allow for detection of these differences
or the differences may not yet be great enough to
detect. Another explanation might be that although
women are often found to cut back on their social
activities to care for their husbands, men might not
cut back to care for their wives, possibly because they
do not have an extensive and active social life to be-
gin with.
Husbands who entered the caregiving role showed
evidence of potentially detrimental changes in the
marital relationship. Caregiving husbands reported a
significantly greater decline in marital happiness and
were more likely to perceive that their marriage was
in trouble than husbands in the well spouse group.
This is consistent with findings reported by Russo and
Vitaliano (1995) in which greater decrements in mari-
tal relationship were reported among caregivers as com-
pared to noncaregiving spouses. We do not know how
many later-life marriages end in divorce as a result of
illness. But given that declines in marital happiness are
strongly linked to divorce (Johnson & Booth, 1998),
these findings suggest that more attention should be
given to the potential implications of these findings
for later-life families.
Finally, this study found evidence of reduced psy-
chological well-being among husbands who have tran-
sitioned into the caregiving role. Not surprisingly, these
husbands are becoming less happy and more depressed
than husbands with well spouses, even after control-
ling for age, employment status, income, and race.
Although these findings are not surprising, they do sug-
gest that older men who acquire the spousal caregiving
role are worse off in terms of psychological well-being
than noncaregiving husbands, and that further atten-
tion should be paid to understanding how the ex-
perience of caregiving is unique for the older man. A
sizable body of research has emerged to explore the
contributors to well-being among caregivers, yet mini-
mal attention has been given to the male caregiver in
Vol. 39, No. 6, 1999 665
this regard. What is it about this later-life transition
that affects these changes in well-being? Is it the
mere presence of spousal illness and concern about
their health? Is it the strain associated with providing
care? Answers to these questions could be central to
gender-sensitive intervention development.
Although we believe this analysis fills an important
gap in the caregiving literature, we readily acknowl-
edge several of its limitations. First, we are well aware
that our inclusion criteria restrain the extent to which
these results may be generalizable beyond the rela-
tively healthy husbands aged 60 or over who make
up this sample. The changes experienced over time
in household tasks, social life, marital relationship, and
well-being may indeed be very different for older men
who themselves have serious chronic conditions and
need care. Similarly, we recognize that many of the
wives receiving care in this sample were not restricted
in ADLs. Results may vary among husbands caring for
wives with more intense caregiving needs. Second, the
caregiver group has a relatively small n, and this fact
limits the power to detect group differences and also
raises the question of stability of findings if a replica-
tion study were done. It is noteworthy that, even with
such a small sample, several significant findings emerged.
Third, although secondary analysis of national prob-
ability data holds many advantages, there are also
measurement and design limitations. For example, though
less than ideal, there are several single-item indicators
that were used in order to obtain a breadth of data in
multiple domains, and the duration of time between
T1 and T2 is 5 years. Finally, we do not have data on
duration of caregiving, duration of illness, or additional
resources that husbands may or may not have in meet-
ing the needs of their wives, so we do not control for
these variables. Our hope is that this population-level
study will suggest areas for further inquiry into the older
male caregiver and complement the richer and more
in-depth studies of caregiving that are underway.
Conclusions and Implications.--These limitations
not withstanding, the results from this study demon-
strate that there are several changes in multiple life
domains over time among husbands who transition into
the caregiving role. The particular changes that occur
suggest several potential implications for practitioners
who work with older caregiving men. First, their in-
creased participation in religious social events might
suggest alternative settings in which supportive or educa-
tional interventions might be offered to later-life couples.
Greater emphasis could be placed on providing inter-
ventions in religious settings that could help to pre-
pare the growing population of male caregivers for
the transitions associated with spousal illness. Programs
could be developed to help noncaregiving members
of religious institutions to become better educated about
the best ways to support those in caregiving roles and
those who become ill. Second, we would advocate
that interventions be designed with couples in mind,
as opposed to targeting programs to individual care-
givers. Spousal illness and spousal caregiving are highly
interpersonal endeavors, and this study suggests that
they may potentially have a detrimental impact on the
marital relationship. As one partner experiences loss
associated with illness and the other responds, and
both partners experience the changing roles that ac-
company transitions in later life, it seems preferable
to consider ways to intervene therapeutically with both
the husband and his ill wife. Third, as mentioned pre-
viously, further investigation is required to understand
better what the changes in household tasks mean to
the older husband caregiver and the role that these
changes play in the husband's well-being. Such un-
derstanding could reveal potential implications for in-
tervention (e.g., educational programs for skill devel-
opment in household tasks).
In conclusion, the image portrayed by these find-
ings concerning husbands' shifting household roles and
the decline in emotional support, accompanied by a
heightened sense of marital instability and depressive
symptoms, does not suggest the benign experience of
male caregiving that is so frequently conveyed in gen-
der comparative studies. The results also suggest the
importance of carefully examining the characteristics
of persons included in noncaregiving comparison groups.
For example, many caregiving studies use spousal ill-
ness condition as an indicator of caregiving. We found
that 11% of older husbands in this sample had wives
with serious chronic illness conditions that are similar
to those reported by caregiving husbands, yet they did
not identify with trie caregiving role. This study has
revealed several important findings, but it has also
raised many more questions that require investigation
so that a fuller understanding of the unique experi-
ence of the older male caregiver may be revealed.
References
Ade-Ridder, L, & Brubaker, T. (1988). Expected and reported division of
responsibility of household tasks among older wives in two residential
settings. Journal of Consumer Studies and Home Economics, 12, 59- 70.
Allen, S. M. (1994). Gender differences in spousal caregiving and unmet
need for care. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 49, S187-195.
Barber, C. E., & Pasley, B. K. (1995). Family care of Alzheimer's patients:
The role of gender and generational relationship on caregiver out-
comes. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 14, 172-192.
Bass, D. M., McClendon, M. J., Deimling, G. T., & Mukherjee, S. (1994).
The influence of a diagnosed mental impairment on family caregiver
strain. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 49, S146-S155.
Beckett, J. O., & Dungee-Anderson, D. (1992). Older minorities: Asian,
Black, Hispanic, and Native Americans. In R. Schneider & N. Kropf
(Eds.), Gerontological social work: Knowledge, service settings, and
special populations (pp. 277-322). Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall Publishers.
Biegel, D. E., Sales, E., & Schulz, R. (1991). Family caregiving in chronic
illness: Alzheimer's disease, cancer, heart disease, mental illness, and
stroke. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Blazer, D., & Palmore, E. (1976). Religion and aging in a longitudinal
panel. The Gerontologist, 16, 82-85.
Blieszner, R., & Shifflett, P. A. (1990). The effects of Alzheimer's disease
on close relationships between patients and caregivers. Family Rela-
tions, 39, 57-62.
Booth, A., & Johnson, D. R. (1994). Declining health and marital quality.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 56, 218-223.
Brubaker, T. H., & Kinsel, B. I. (1985). Who is responsible for household
tasks in long-term marriages of the "young-old" elderly? Lifestyles, 7,
23Q-274.
Burman, B., & Margolin, G. (1992). Analysis of the association between
marital relationships and health problems: An interactional perspec-
tive. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 39-63.
Buunk, B., & Hoorens, V. (1992). Social support and stress: The role of
social comparison and social exchange processes. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 31, 445-457.
Cantor, M. (1983). Strain among caregivers: A study of experience in the
United States. The Gerontologist, 23, 597-604.
Chang, C. F., & White-Means, S. I. (1991). The men who care: An analy-
sis of male primary caregivers who care for frail elderly at home. The
Journal of Applied Gerontology, 10, 343-358.
666 The Gerontologist
Chappell, N. L. (1990). Aging and social care. In R. H. Binstock & L. K.
George (Eds.), Handbook on aging and the social sciences (3rd ed.,
pp. 438-454). New York: Academic Press.
Chiriboga, D. A. (1996). In search of continuities and discontinuities across
time and culture. In V. L. Bengtson (Ed.), Adulthood and aging: Re-
search on continuities and discontinuities (pp. 173-199), New York:
Springer.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation
analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence
Erlbaum Associates.
Cowan, P. A. (1991). Individual and family life transitions: A proposal for
a new definition. In P. A. Cowan & M. Hetherington (Eds.), Family
transitions (pp. 3-30). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dorfman, L. T., & Heckert, D. A. (1988). Egalitarianism in retired rural
couples: Household tasks, decision making, and leisure activities. Family
Relations, 37, 73-78.
Elder, G. H. (1991). Family transitions, cycles, and social change. In P. A.
Cowan & M. Hetherington (Eds.), Family transitions (pp. 31-57). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fuller-Jonap, F., & Haley, W. E. (1995). Mental and physical health of
male caregivers of a spouse with Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Aging
and Health, 7, 99-118.
George, L. K. (1993). Sociological perspectives on life transitions. Annual
Review of Sociology, 19, 353-373.
George, L. K., & Gwyther, L. P. (1986). Caregiver well-being: A multidi-
mensional examination of family caregivers of demented adults. The
Gerontologist, 26, 253-259.
Hafstrom, J. L., & Schram, V. R. (1984). Chronic illness in couples: Se-
lected characteristics, including wife's satisfaction with and perception
of marital relationships. Family Relations, 33, 195-203.
Himes, C. L. (1992). Future caregivers: Projected family structures of older
persons. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 47, S17-S26.
Idler, E. L., & Kasl, S. V. (1997). Religion among disabled and nondis-
abled persons I: Cross-sectional patterns in health practices, social
activities, and well-being. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 52B,
S294-S305.
Johnson, D. R., & Booth, A. (1998). Marital quality: A product of the
dyadic environment or individual factors? Social Forces, 76, 883-904.
Johnson, C, & Catalano, D. (1983). A longitudinal study of family sup-
ports to impaired elderly. The Gerontologist, 23, 612-618.
Kaye, L. W., & Applegate, J. S. (1994). Older men and the family caregiving
orientation. In E. H. Thompson, Jr. (Ed.)., Older men's lives (pp. 218-
236). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Keith, P. M. (1980). Sex differences in household involvement of the un-
married. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 2, 331-334.
Keith, P. M. (1985). Work, retirement and well-being among unmarried
men and women. The Gerontologist, 25, 410-416.
Keith, P. M. (1994). A typology of orientations toward household and
marital roles of older men and women. In E. H. Thompson, Jr. (Ed.),
Older men's lives (pp. 141-158). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Keith, P. M., & Schafer, R. B. (1986). Housework, disagreement, and
depression among younger and older couples. American Behavioral
Scientist, 29, 405-422.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Glaser, R., Shuttleworth, E. C, Dyer, C. S., Ogrocki, P.,
& Speicher, C. E. (1987). Chronic stress and immunity in family caregivers
of Alzheimer's disease victims. Psychosomatic Medicine, 49, 523-535.
Kramer, B. J., & Kipnis, S. (1995). Eldercare and work-role conflict: To-
ward an understanding of gender differences in caregiver burden. The
Gerontologist, 35, 340-348.
Kramer, B. J., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1994). Coping: A review of the theoreti-
cal frameworks and the measures used among caregivers of individual
with dementia. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 23, 151-174.
Kriegsman, D. M. W., Penninx, B. W. J. H., & van Eljk, J. Th. M. (1994).
Chronic disease in the elderly and its impact on the family: A review
of the literature. Family Systems Medicine, 12, 249-267.
Leiber, L., Plumb, M. M., Gerstenzang, M. L., & Holland, J. (1976). The
communication of affection between cancer patients and their spouses.
Psychosomatic Medicine 38, 379-389.
Lichtmann, R. R., & Taylor, S. E. (1986). Close relationships and the fe-
male cancer patient. In B. L. Andersen (Ed.), Women with cancer
(233-256). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Macken, C. L. (1986). A profile of functionally impaired elderly persons
living in the community. Health Care Financing Review, 7(4), 33-49.
Marks, N. F. (1996). Caregiving across the lifespan: National prevalence
and predictors. Family Relations, 45, 27-36.
Markides, K. S. (1983). Aging, religiosity, and adjustment: A longitudinal
analysis. Journal of Gerontology, 38, 621-625
Markides, K. S., Levin, J. S., & Ray, L. A. (1987). Religion, aging, and life
satisfaction: An eight-year, three-wave longitudinal study. The Geron-
tologist, 27, 660-665.
Markides, K. S., Liang, J., & Jackson, J. (1990). Race, ethnicity, and aging.
In R. H. Binstock, & L. K. George (Eds.), Handbook of aging and the
social sciences (3rd ed., pp. 112-129). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
McNaughton, M. E., Patterson, T. L., Smith, T. L., & Grant, I. (1995). The
relationship among stress, depression, locus of control, irrational be-
liefs, social support, and health in Alzheimer's disease caregivers. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 183(2), 78-85.
Montgomery, R. J. V. (1996). The influence of social context on the caregiving
experience. In Z. S. Khachaturian & T. S. Radebaugh (Eds.), Alzheimer's
disease: Cause(s), diagnosis, treatment and care (pp. 313-321). Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Morris, L. W., Morris, R. G., & Britton, P. G. (1988). The relationship
between marital intimacy, perceived strain, and depression in spouse
caregivers of dementia sufferers. British Journal or Medical Psychol-
ogy, 61, 231-236.
Pearlin, L. I., & Aneshensel, C. S. (1994). Caregiving: The unexpected
career. Social Justice Research, 7, 373-390.
Princeton Religion Research Center. (1994). Importance of religion climb-
ing again. Emerging Trends, 16, 1-4.
Radloff, L. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for
research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measure-
ment, 1, 385-401.
Reese, D. R., Gross, A. M., Smalley, D. L, & Messer, S. C. (1994). The
Gerontologist, 34, 534-540.
Revenson, T. A., (1994). Social support and marital coping with chronic
illness. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 16, 122-130.
Revenson, T. A., & Majerovitz, S. D. (1991). The effects of chronic illness
on the spouse: Social resources as stress buffers. Arthritis Care & Re-
search, 4(2), 63-72.
Rexroat, C, & Shehan, C. (1987). The family life cycle and spouses' time
in housework. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 49, 737-750.
Roberts, R., & Vernon, S. (1983). The Center for Epidemiological Studies
Depression Scale: Its use in a community sample. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 140, 41.
Russo, J., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1995). Life events as correlates of burden in
spouse caregivers of persons with Alzheimer's disease. Experimental
Aging Research, 21, 273-294.
Russo, J., Vitaliano, P. P., Brewer, D. D., Katon, W., & Becker, J. (1995).
Psychiatric disorders in spouse caregivers of care recipients with Alz-
heimer's disease and matched controls: A diathesis-stress model of
psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 197-204.
Schumacher, K. L. (1995). Family caregiver role acquisition: Role-making
through situated interaction. Scholarly Inquiry for Nursing Practice:
An International Journal, 9, 211-229.
Seltzer, M. M., & Li, L. W. (1996). The transitions of caregiving: Subjec-
tive and objective definitions. The Gerontologist, 36, 614-626.
Singleton, J. F., Forbes, W. F., & Agwani, N. (1993). Stability of activity
across the lifespan. Activities, Adaptation, & Aging, 18, 19-27.
Skaff, M. M., Pearlin, L. I., & Mullan, J. T. (1996). Transitions in the
caregiving career: Effects on sense of mastery. Psychology and Aging,
11, 247-257.
Soldo, B. J., & Myllyluoma, J. (1983). Caregivers who live with dependent
elderly. The Gerontologist, 23, 605-611.
Stevens, J. (1986). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stoller, E. P., & Cutler, S. (1992). The impact of gender on configurations of
care among married elderly couples. Research on Aging, 14, 313-330.
Stone, R., Cafferata, G., & Sangl, J. (1987). Caregivers of the frail elderly:
A national profile. The Gerontologist, 27, 616-626.
Suitor, J. J., & Pillemer, K. (1990). Transitions to the status of family caregiver:
A new framework for studying social support and well-being. In S. M.
Stahl (Ed.), The legacy of longevity: Health and health care in later life
(pp. 310-320). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sweet, J. A., Bumpass, L. L., & Call, V. (1988). The design and content of
the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH Working Pa-
per #1). Madison, Wl: Center for Demography and Ecology, Univer-
sity of Wisconsin.
Szinovacz, M. (1980). Female retirement: Effects on spousal roles and
marital adjustment. Journal of Family Issues, 1, 423-440.
Szinovacz, M. (1989). Retirement, couples, and household work. In S. J.
Bahr & E. T. Peterson (Eds.), Aging and the family (pp. 33-58). New
York: Lexington Books.
Szinovacz, M., & Harpster, P. (1994). Couples' employment/retirement
status and the division of household tasks. Journal of Gerontology:
Social Sciences, 49, S125-S136.
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (1989). Using multivariate statistics. New
York: Harper Collins.
Thompson, S. C, & Pitts, J. S. (1991). In sickness and in health: Chronic
illness, marriage, and spousal caregiving. In S. Spacapan, & S. Oskamp
(Eds.), Helping and being helped: Naturalistic studies (pp. 115-151).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Toseland, R. W., & Rossiter, C. M. (1989). Group interventions to support
family caregivers: A review and analysis. The Gerontologist, 29, 438-
448.
Van der Does, J. V. S., & Duyvis, D. J. (1989). Psychosocial adjustment of
spouses of cervical carcinoma patients. Journal of Psychosomatic in
Obstetrics and Gynaecology 10, 163-171.
Wright, L. K. (1991). The impact of Alzheimer's disease on the marital
relationship. The Gerontologist, 31, 224-237.
Wright, L. K. (1993). Alzheimer's disease and marriage: An intimate ac-
count. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Received April 22, 1999
Accepted August 24, 1999
Vol. 39, No. 6, 1999 667
