Comparing Employee
Health Benefits In The
Public And Private
Sectors, 1997
The benefits of government workers stack up well against those
in the private sector, and government workers are more likely to
be offered health insurance at work.
by Stephen H. Long and M. Susan Marquis
ABSTRACT: Data from the 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer
Health Insurance Survey provide new information comparing public- and
private-sector employee health benefits. The federal government is ahead of
other employers in adopting managed competition principles using financial
incentives and consumer information to promote choosing efficient plans. Fed-
eral employees experience a $200 annual compensation gap relative to those
in the private sector, but it is partly explained by advantage in purchasing power.
In contrast, state and local governments make higher payments toward health
insurance than private-sector employers do. Their premiums are equivalent, but
they pay a greater share of the total cost.
Policymakers have a long-standi ng interest in
comparisons of the health benefit plans sponsored by public
and private employers. These comparisons can inform them
about "best practices" under managed competition, parity of com-
pensation between public- and private-sector workers, and the pos-
sible costs of permitting legal action against private employers and
their health plans over delayed or wrongfully denied benefits.
The Federal Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP) has
long been touted as a model for health system reform based on
managed competition, as have some state employee plans (such as
those of California, Minnesota, and Wisconsin).1 More recently, ma-
jor corporations and universities have jumped on the managed com-
petition bandwagon.2 Although the public sector took the lead origi-
nally, how do the two sectors compare today, in view of the private
sector's more recent efforts?
©1999ThePeople-to-People Health Foundation,Inc.
The authors are senior economists at RAND in Washington, D.C.
DATAWATCH 183
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
It is commonplace for journalists, legislators, and taxpayers to
express concern that public employees are overpaid relative to their
private-sector counterparts.3 The evidence on this topic is mixed,
however, and subject to concerns about methodological flaws.4
Moreover, there is considerably more and better evidence on pay
and pensions than there is on health insurance benefits.5 The two
empirical studies we found that compared health benefits suggest
that federal employees' health benefits are not as generous as those
in the private sector.6 For example, the Congressional Budget Office
(CBO) estimates that the value of employer-paid federal health in-
surance ranges from 77 percent to 89 percent of that in large private
companies, a shortfall of $445­$629 annually across the five hypo-
thetical federal employees of different ages for whom they produced
illustrative calculations.7 Information on the health benefits of state
and local public employees relative to private employees is scant.8
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) now
protects private employers and their health insurers and health
maintenance organizations (HMOs) from lawsuits related to wrong-
ful denial or delay of health benefits. This litigation, which other-
wise would be permitted under many state laws, also is prohibited
under the law governing the FEHBP. However, it is permitted for
state and local government employees, whose employers and health
plans are exempt from ERISA.9 Proposed legislation for a patients'
bill of rights would amend the ERISA preemption of state law to
extend the right of litigation to private employees. Opponents argue
that this would cause health insurance premiums to rise. Current
law provides a natural experiment whereby, in principle, compari-
sons of premiums for state and local government employees versus
those of private employees provide a measure of the costs. Evidence
on these magnitudes is scant, and estimates cover a wide range.10
The purpose of this DataWatch is to provide new descriptive
statistics comparing the health benefits provided to public- and
private-sector employees. We also provide some new evidence on
the issues of pay comparability and liability costs. The estimates are
based on a large national survey of private and public employers in
1997.
Methods
Our data are from the 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
(RWJF) Employer Health Insurance Survey, which collected infor-
mation from a sample of private business establishments and local
government units, from each state government in the forty-eight
contiguous states and the District of Columbia, and from the federal
government. Details about the data collection from private employ-
184 COMPARING
BENEFITS
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ V o l u m e 1 8 , N u m b e r 6
D a t a W a t c h
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
ers are described elsewhere in this volume.11 Here we briefly describe
the methods to collect public-sector information.12
The 1992 Census of Governments was the sampling frame for
local government employers. The frame was stratified by geography
and by employer size, with simple random samples selected from
within each stratum. Interviews were completed with 713 local gov-
ernment units, following the procedures for interviewing private
employers. Sampled public and private employers are weighted to
account for different sampling probabilities and for nonresponse.
We use employee or health plan enrollee weights throughout this
DataWatch because our interest is in comparing the coverage of
workers in different employment settings.13
We collected information about all state government employees
in each state and the District of Columbia using data-collection
procedures similar to those for private businesses and local govern-
ments. Interviewers contacted a person in each state government
knowledgeable about health insurance benefits and attempted to
complete the computer-assisted telephone interview. However,
procedures were adapted to reduce the reporting burden. Special
worksheets were developed for state representatives to fill out in
lieu of reporting the information over the telephone. Some states
elected to send plan booklets, which were then abstracted by inter-
view staff into the interview format.
Information about federal employees was obtained primarily
from administrative records. Employee data came from the Central
Personnel Data file provided by the U.S. Office of Personnel Manage-
ment (OPM). Health plan enrollments were obtained from the
Health Benefits Data file, also provided by the OPM. Details about
the coverage provisions of all federal health plans were abstracted
from the OPM Internet site.
Our analysis examines differences in health plan participation
among private and public workers, in the extent and nature of plan
choice available to them, in the types of financial incentives and
comparative plan information provided, and in total premiums and
employer contributions to premiums. The questions used to deter-
mine health plan choice, to classify plans by type, and to establish
the kinds of financial incentives and information available to em-
ployees are described elsewhere in this volume.14
Health insurance premiums and employer contributions for both
"The health plans available to private-sector workers are more
likely to be restricted to one type of managed care plan."
DATAWATCH 185
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
single and family coverage were reported for each health insurance
plan offered. Some employers offer coverage for special services,
such as dental care or prescription drugs, in plans that are separate
from the general medical plan. We constructed premiums and em-
ployer contributions for the package of benefits held by enrollees by
adding together the premiums and contributions paid for both the
general medical plan and for any plans covering special services.
Because we collected information on the enrollments in the special-
service plans as well as the general medical plans, we can determine
how many enrollees hold the expanded package of benefits, includ-
ing these special-service plans, and how many hold just the general
medical plan benefits.
We report premiums that are adjusted for differences in the actu-
arial value of plan benefits and for differences in the characteristics
of employees in different groups. The actuarial value of plan benefits
is measured by estimating average plan benefit payments for a stan-
dardized distribution of expenditures. The adjusted premiums also
control for differences between the sectors in the distribution of
workers by age, sex, and hours worked.15
Study Results
Likelihood of coverage. Employees in the public sector are more
likely than employees in the private sector are to receive health
insurance as part of their compensation (Exhibit 1). Overall, 60
percent of private-sector workers are enrolled in their employer's
health insurance plan, compared with 79 percent of public-sector
workers. Most of the difference is attributable to fewer private-
sector than public-sector employees working for an employer that
offers health insurance (83 percent versus 99 percent). The lower
rates of offering insurance to private-sector employees can be traced
to smaller firms' decisions not to offer insurance.16 The offer of insur-
ance to employees in large private firms (those with 500 or more
employees) is the same as for public-sector employees. As a result,
EXHIBIT 1
Employees' Health Plan Participation, By Type Of Employer, 1997
Employees enrolled in their own employer's plana 60% 50% 76% 79% 71% 81%
Employees in firms offering insurance
Eligible employees among those in firms
offering insurance
Enrolled employees among those eligible
83
84
87
72
81
85
99
86
89
99
89
90
100
93
77
99
88
93
SOURCE: 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer Health Insurance Survey.
a This overall enrollment rate is the product of the offer, eligibility, and participation rates shown in the next three rows.
186 COMPARING
BENEFITS
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ V o l u m e 1 8 , N u m b e r 6
D a t a W a t c h
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
participation in health insurance for employees in large private firms
also is similar to the overall rate for those in the public sector (76
percent versus 79 percent).
The results for all public-sector employees mask some differences
between federal and state or local government workers. Eligibility
for insurance is higher among federal employees than among other
public- or private-sector employees. Participation rates among
workers who are eligible to enroll are lowest for federal workers and
highest for workers in state and local governments. As we show
below, this pattern mirrors differences in the amount of the health
insurance premium contributed by the employer.
Choice of plans. There are substantial differences in the extent
and nature of the choice of health plans available to workers in the
private and public sectors. Only 43 percent of private-sector health
plan enrollees had a choice of plans in 1997, in contrast to 100 per-
cent of federal employees and 70 percent of state and local govern-
ment workers (Exhibit 2). This difference is only partly explained
by the limited choice offered by small private employers.17 Only 59
percent of plan enrollees in large firms had a choice of health
plans--still far less choice than what is available to those in the
public sector.
The health plans available to private-sector workers are more
likely to be restricted to one type of managed care plan--that is,
HMOs, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), or point-of-service
(POS) plans--whereas government workers are more likely to have
a choice of plan types as well. Among all private-sector plan en-
rollees, 53 percent are offered a single type of managed care plan,
while only 35 percent are offered a choice of type of plan--either
multiple types of managed care products or a choice that includes an
indemnity product (Exhibit 2). Even among health plan enrollees in
large private firms, only 49 percent have a choice of plan types. In
contrast, all federal plan enrollees and 64 percent of state and local
EXHIBIT 2
Health Plan Choices Offered To Enrollees, By Type Of Employer, 1997
Enrollees offered a choice of plans 43% 25% 59% 74% 100% 70%
Enrollees by type of plan offered
One type of managed care plan only
Indemnity only
Multiple types of managed care plans,
no indemnity plan
Managed care and indemnity plans
53
12
20
15
68
14
11
7
39
12
27
22
25
7
38
30
0
0
99
1
28
8
29
35
SOURCE: 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer Health Insurance Survey.
DATAWATCH 187
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
plan enrollees have a choice of plan types.
Types of plans selected. Despite the very large differences in the
extent of choice offered, there is much less difference in the types of
plans elected by public- and private-sector health plan enrollees.
Overall, POS plans are slightly more common among private em-
ployees than among public employees, while PPO plans have
slightly lower enrollment among those in the private sector (Exhibit
3). These differences are somewhat more pronounced in compari-
sons of public employees with private employees in large firms.
Among the latter, 21 percent are enrolled in POS plans and 33 per-
cent in PPO plans; the corresponding numbers for public-sector
plan enrollees are 9 percent and 38 percent. HMOs receive a greater
share of enrollment among private-sector employees in small firms
than among other private or public employees, because many small
employers limit choice to a single HMO.18
Managed competition. The federal government has led the way
in adopting managed competition principles. In general, the federal
government's contribution policy is to pay a fixed-dollar contribu-
tion to any plan to which the enrollee subscribes, thus leaving the
employee with the full cost of choosing a more expensive plan (Ex-
hibit 4).19 Among state and local government health plan enrollees,
42 percent receive an equal employer contribution regardless of the
plan selected. In contrast, only 25 percent of private-sector health
plan enrollees offered a choice of plans pay the full cost of choosing
a more expensive plan.
Information on quality. All federal workers have access to com-
parative information on the quality of their health plan choices (Ex-
hibit 4). However, provision of this information is not prevalent for
other workers. Only about one-third of plan enrollees in large pri-
vate firms or in state and local government receive information to
help them evaluate the quality of their health plan options.20
Premiums. Average total monthly premiums paid for enrollees
covered by the FEHBP are lower than premiums paid by private
EXHIBIT 3
Enrollment In Different Types Of Plans, By Type Of Employer, 1997
HMO
POS
33%
15
40%
8
26%
21
33%
9
36%
4
33%
10
PPO
Indemnity
34
18
36
16
33
20
38
20
60
1
34
23
SOURCE: 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer Health Insurance Survey.
NOTES: HMO is health maintenance organization. POS is point-of-service. PPO is preferred provider organization.
188 COMPARING
BENEFITS
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ V o l u m e 1 8 , N u m b e r 6
D a t a W a t c h
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
employers overall (Exhibit 5). These comparisons are adjusted for
differences in the scope and breadth of benefits, as well as differ-
ences in the composition and, therefore, health risk of the popula-
tions. On the other hand, premiums for private-sector employees do
not differ greatly from those for state and local government employ-
ees. These conclusions apply both overall and to workers in large
firms.
Contribution share. Private employers contribute a higher share
of the premium for single coverage than does the federal govern-
ment, but they contribute a smaller share than state and local gov-
ernments do. As noted earlier, these patterns mirror differences in
participation rates among eligible workers, which are lowest for
federal employees and highest for state and local employees. This
suggests that workers' decisions to enroll are related to the amount
the employer contributes to the coverage.
The picture differs when we look at contribution rates for family
coverage. Private employers and state and local governments con-
EXHIBIT 4
Use Of Financial Incentives And Provision Of Comparative Quality Information,
By Type Of Employer, 1997
Enrollees with a fixed-dollar contribution
Enrollees provided with comparative
quality information
25%
­a
28%
­a
23%
30
52%
51
100%
100
42%
36
SOURCE: 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer Health Insurance Survey.
NOTE: Data are limited to employers offering a choice of plans.
a Not asked of private employers with fewer than 500 employees.
EXHIBIT 5
Premiums, Employer Contributions, And Benefits For Health Plan Enrollees,
By Type Of Employer, 1997
Adjusted total monthly premiuma
Single coverage
Family coverage
$184
464
$176
435
$192
488
$187
450
$160
384
$191
460
Employer contribution share
Single coverage
Family coverage
85%
70
86%
67
84%
72
93%
78
81%
78
95%
78
Employer contribution level
Single coverage
Family coverage
$158
325
$149
291
$165
355
$182
362
$140
310
$188
370
SOURCE: 1997 Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Employer Health Insurance Survey.
a Adjusted total monthly premium is the monthly premium adjusted for the actuarial value of plan benefits and the distribution of
workers by age, sex, and hours worked.
DATAWATCH 189
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
tribute a smaller proportion of the cost of dependent coverage than
for employee coverage. As a result, these employers' contribution
shares for family coverage are lower than their contributions for
single coverage. The federal government contribution for family cov-
erage (78 percent), however, is similar to that for employee-only
coverage (81 percent). Moreover, the share of the family premium
paid by the federal government is higher than that paid by private
employers or state governments.21
The relative contribution to dependent coverage appears to be
related to employees' decisions to elect family coverage. Among fed-
eral enrollees, who receive similar contribution rates for workers
and dependents, 65 percent elect family coverage (not shown). In
contrast, only about half of enrollees in private employers' plans or
in state and local government plans do so.
Contribution level. The dollar amount that employers contrib-
ute to the health insurance plan is the direct monetary value of the
health insurance component of the worker's compensation pack-
age.22 This dollar contribution is lowest for federal workers and
highest for employees in state and local governments.
Discussion
The federal government continues to hold a leadership position
among employers in adopting managed competition principles.23 It
offers a wide array of choices to its eligible employees, providing
them with financial incentives to shop for low-cost plans and com-
parative information to assist them in their decisions. State and local
government employers fall somewhere in the middle. The majority
of their workers are offered a choice of both plans and plan types. On
the other hand, strong financial incentives and the provision of in-
formation for informed choice are not as pervasive among these
employers as in the federal program. In contrast to the public sector,
most private employers--even larger ones--have not begun using
best practices of health insurance purchasing.
We offer a more positive spin than others have offered in compar-
ing the health insurance benefits of federal versus private workers.
Although the federal government makes lower direct payments for
health insurance on behalf of its enrollees, the gap is much smaller
than previously believed. We estimate that annual federal health
benefit payments fall about $200 per enrollee short of those for all
"The federal government leads all other employers in using best
practices of health insurance purchasing."
190 COMPARING
BENEFITS
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ V o l u m e 1 8 , N u m b e r 6
D a t a W a t c h
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
private-sector enrollees, lower than the roughly $450­$630 gap re-
cently reported by the CBO.24 Moreover, several other factors work
in the direction of offsetting this shortfall. Eligibility for health in-
surance benefits is more likely to be a part of the compensation
package for federal workers than for private workers.25 Once eligi-
ble, federal workers have greater opportunity to choose a plan and a
type of plan. We expect that workers value this range of choice.
Finally, part of the reason for the lesser federal contribution amount
apparently derives from the better purchasing power of the federal
government. Overall, FEHBP premiums are lower than private-
sector premiums, even after we control for differences in benefit
packages and population characteristics.
Premiums paid by state and local governments (which are ex-
empt from ERISA) are similar to those paid by private-sector em-
ployers. This appears to contrast with the hypothesis offered by
opponents of extending litigation rights, who argue that it will lead
to higher costs. However, we are not able to control for a number of
factors that might affect these comparisons, such as differences in
purchasing power or the breadth of provider panels. Our adjust-
ments for risk also may be incomplete and mask true premium dif-
ferences. Moreover, the relatively equal levels of premiums we ob-
serve may reflect the now limited right to sue employers and health
plans among enrollees across all sectors. If patients' right to sue were
extended to all employees in the future, costlier behavior among
providers and plans might be induced.26
This research was supported by Grants no. 028561 and no. 031565 from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) and by Contract no. J-9-P-7-0045 from the Pen-
sion and Welfare Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). Any
views expressed herein are solely those of the authors, and no endorsement by the
RWJF, the DOL, or RAND is intended or should be inferred. The authors thank
LindaAndrewsandRoaldEullerfortheireffortsinpreparingthesurveydatafileson
which this paper is based.
NOTES
1. A.C. Enthoven, "Consumer-Choice Health Plan (Second of Two Parts)," New
England Journal of Medicine (30 March 1978): 709­720; A.C. Enthoven, "The His-
tory and Principles of Managed Competition," Health Affairs (Supplement
1993): 24­48; W. Francis, "A Health Care Program Run by the Federal Govern-
ment That Works," American Enterprise (July/August 1993): 50­61; E.W. Hoy,
E.K. Wicks, and R.A. Forland, "A Guide to Facilitating Consumer Choice,"
Health Affairs (Winter 1996): 9­30; and M.L. Maciejewski, B.E. Dowd, and R.
Feldman, "How Do States Buy Health Insurance for Their Own Employees?"
Managed Care Quarterly (Summer 1997): 11­19.
2. T. Bodenheimer and K. Sullivan, "How Large Employers Are Shaping the
Health Care Marketplace (First of Two Parts)," New England Journal of Medicine
(2 April 1998): 1003­1007; T.C. Buchmueller, "Does a Fixed-Dollar Premium
DATAWATCH 191
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
Contribution Lower Spending?" Health Affairs (November/December 1998):
228­235; D.M. Cutler and S. Reber, "Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-
Off between Competition and Adverse Selection," Quarterly Journalof Economics
(May 1998): 433­466; H. Darling, "Employers and Managed Care: What Are
the Early Returns?" Health Affairs (Winter 1991): 147­160; H. Darling, "Market
Reform: Large Corporations Lead the Way," Health Affairs (Spring 1995):
122­124; Enthoven, "The History and Principles;" Hoy et al., "A Guide to
Facilitating Consumer Choice;" and J. Maxwell et al., "Managed Competition
in Practice: `Value Purchasing' by Fourteen Employers," Health Affairs (May/
June 1998): 216­226.
3. See, for example, P. Peterson, Facing Up: How to Rescue the Economy from Crushing
Debt and Restore the American Dream (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993),
103­104, under the subheading referring to federal employees' "Benefits Bo-
nanza."
4. B. Braden and S. Hyland, "Cost of Employee Compensation in Public and
Private Sectors," Monthly Labor Review (May 1993): 14­21; and M. Miller, "The
Public-Private Pay Debate: What Do the Data Show?" Monthly Labor Review
(May 1996): 18­29.
5. Braden and Hyland, "Cost of Employee Compensation;" A.C. Foster, "Public
and Private Sector Defined Benefit Pensions: A Comparison," Compensation and
Working Conditions (Summer 1997): 37­43; Miller, "The Public-Private Pay De-
bate;" and W. Wiatrowski, "On the Disparity between Private and Public
Pensions," Monthly LaborReview (April 1994): 3­9.
6. Congressional Budget Office, Comparing Federal Employee Benefits with Those in the
Private Sector (Washington: CBO, August 1998); and Congressional Research
Service, Federal Civil Service Retirement: Comparing the Generosity of Federal and
Private-Sector Retirement Systems, CRS Report for Congress no. 95-687 EPW
(Washington: CRS, 5 June 1995).
7. CBO, Comparing Federal Employee Benefits. Absent nationally representative data
on private benefits, the values for private-sectoremployees were based on data
characterizing large companies from an employee benefit consulting firm con-
venience sample.
8. Overall, cost per labor hour for health insurance is higher in these govern-
ments, but this is largely owing to a larger share of all employees' being offered
and participating in health plans, as well as a somewhat higher percentage of
covered state and local employees' having fully paid benefits. See Braden and
Hyland, "Cost of Employee Compensation;" and A.C. Foster, "Brief: Employee
Benefits in the United States, 1993­94," Compensation and Working Conditions
(Spring 1997): 46­50. We did not find relative values of premiums for state
and local enrollees in the literature.
9. California HealthPolicy Roundtable, HealthPlanLiability (Berkeley, Calif.: Cen-
ter for Health and Public Policy Studies, University of California, June 1999);
U.S. General Accounting Office, Employer-Based Health Plans: Issues, Trends, and
Challenges Posed by ERISA, GAO/HEHS-95-167 (Washington: GAO, July 1995);
and S. Hunt, J. Saari, and K. Traw, Impact of Potential Changes to ERISA: Litigation
and Appeal Experience of CalPERS, Other LargePublicEmployers, and a Large California
HealthPlan (Menlo Park, Calif.: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, June 1998).
10. California Health Policy Roundtable, Health Plan Liability; and Hunt et al.,
Impact of Potential Changesto ERISA.
11. S.H. Long and M.S. Marquis, "Stability and Variation in Employment-Based
Health Insurance Coverage, 1993­1997," Health Affairs (November/December
1999): 133­139; and M.S. Marquis and S.H. Long, "Trends in Managed Care and
Managed Competition, 1993­1997," HealthAffairs (November/December 1999):
75­88.
192 COMPARING
BENEFITS
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ V o l u m e 1 8 , N u m b e r 6
D a t a W a t c h
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
12. For more details of these methods, see 1997EmployerHealthInsuranceSurvey:Final
Methodology Report (Research Triangle Park, N.C.: Research Triangle Institute,
1998).
13. The weighted samples represent employees in all private employment estab-
lishments that have at least one employee and in all substate government
units. Self-employed persons with no employees are excluded.
14. Long and Marquis, "Stability and Variation;" and Marquis and Long, "Trends
in Managed Care."
15. Specifically, we regressed reported premiums on the actuarial value of the plan
and employee characteristics. We then measured the adjusted premium as the
observed premium for a plan minus the product of the regression coefficients
and the vector of differences between the quantity measures for the plan and
the average value of the quantity measures for all plans. Equivalently, the
adjusted premium is the predicted premium for a plan with average charac-
teristics plus the residual from the regression equation for the specific plan in
question.
16. Long and Marquis, "Stability and Variation."
17. Marquis and Long, "Trends in Managed Care."
18. Ibid.
19. In practice, the federal government pays a fixed-dollar amount not to exceed
75 percent of the plan cost; hence, there is some partial government subsidy of
the difference between the lowest-price and mid-price plans. For all other
employers, our measure of incentives is based on a self-reported contribution
policy.
20. Federal workers are provided results of satisfaction surveys. Among both
private and state and local workers provided information, about 40 percent
receive satisfaction survey results, 10 percent receive outcome measures such
as Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS) measures, and 50
percent receive both types of information.
21. The employer shares for family coverage in state and local governments are 75
percent and 79 percent, respectively (not shown).
22. However, having a choice of plans, the scope and breadth of benefits available,
and the exercise of employer's purchasing power all may have value to the
employee that we are unable to measure directly.
23. This is not to say that the FEHBP does not have its critics. See A.C. Enthoven,
"Effective Management of Competition in the FEHBP," Health Affairs (Fall
1989): 33­50.
24. Much of the difference in the estimates can be explained by the fact that the
CBO used information for an unrepresentative sample of very large employers.
If we had restricted our comparison to all large employers, the estimated gap
would be about $450.
25. The likelihood is similar if the contrast is limited to workers in large private
firms only.
26. California Health Policy Roundtable, Health Plan Liability; and Hunt et al.,
Impact of PotentialChanges to ERISA.
DATAWATCH 193
H E A L T H A F F A I R S ~ N o v e m b e r / D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 9
C O M P A R I N G B E N E F I T S
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by ${individualUser.givenNames} ${individualUser.surname} on October 31, 2017.
Copyright Project HOPE--The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
